Yeah, because silence is like a vacuum, right? Yeah. And nalini, is that the right what is that correct? Nalini?


Yeah, it's interesting. Just jumping back to that example that you gave where you had had an injury, needed to do some rehabilitation and found it really difficult to focus. Then I wonder because generally speaking with ADHD, if you're adrenalized enough and if you're physically active. These are two situations that are usually pretty conducive to being able to focus versus times when there's not a lot of stimulation or there aren't high stakes and stuff like that. Could it be that at that time that a lot of it was to do with feeling stressed, nervous, overwhelmed? In general, I think I ruminate a lot. Like, I'm not doubting the overdiagnosis with that.


Yes. What you're referring to is the inattentive predominantly presentation as opposed to the hyperactive or the mixed presentation.


And about 30% of people in general with ADHD have that in intent of only presentation. I find that it's significantly overrepresented in groups of people who are diagnosed with adults. So there are two kind of main things that I see. One is that yeah, people who are diagnosed with adults are more likely not to have been diagnosed with kids if they have the in attended presentation because they're not likely to be like spotted for that excitable mucking up, potentially characteristic. And the other one is high functioning. So like, while there are certain patterns that pretty well always see with ADHD, when people are able to achieve academically, there will still be these patterns of behavior, like the last minute effect and having a fluctuation of performance in terms of focusing on material in class and stuff like that, depending on the level of genuine interest.


Certainly you can observe looking at and talking to people with ADHD that a lot of people have that kind of aversion to authority. I've definitely seen cases where people don't necessarily have it. So I wonder whether it's like a characteristic of ADHD or whether people actually just are very likely with ADHD to have aversive experiences with authorities. But certainly, regardless of whether it's characteristic trade or whether it's kind of a bit down the line. Yeah, it definitely is something that we see. And fictitious tasks and doing things that are just to tick a box and stuff like that tend to be very difficult for people with ADHD to motivate themselves to do. Does that help you? Sorry, Melanie.


But when it comes to your patient, when you care like a person there and there's a good reason to be patient, you can be patient.


Yeah. It's a bit of a misnomer that the people with ADHD can't have good attention to detail and that's related to this idea of patients as well. And when we tend to rush, like focusing on as long as you see the stakes as high, like it's important enough to do it, focusing is fine in those situations, and particularly having the accountability of another person in front of you. So you've got that kind of clear making it real, but where things are mundane and there's a sense that it's not that useful or important or interesting anyway, but you've got to do it. But these are the things that people with ADHD would tend to rush, which is going to make them more likely to make silly mistakes, but they're trying to get it done as fast as possible and get rid of it. And also then to not to not focus as well on those. Details because they're trying to rush through the next person. Was there anything else you wanted to ask or say? Nelini. Did that help with that?


Tim, you're the next on my list there today.


So hopefully I'll be able to be more helpful than the coach. Yeah. I should mention that the experience that you talked about, by the way, regarding the medication and the tolerance over time, it's not everybody who struggles with that, but I definitely it's reasonably common. And I mean, I've experienced that myself, where I realized pretty early on in the piece with my psychiatrist that tolerance was just occurring too quickly. And so the solution that we came up with was to make sure I had at least one day off a week, for example. So some people manage it by intentionally keeping it down and having some degree of the effect. Some can get a benefit like you did by switching to the long acting form, and then others will, like, take a day off and stuff like that. I just mentioned in a case that relates to anybody else who might not have figured it out yet for themselves, not yet.


That'S perfect. Yeah, it's funny that you give the description of that, having lots and lots of ideas. I'm just jumping forward to a section that relates to that that I kind of put up as like a meme for today. Here the ADHD experience in conversation. So the idea of what your teachers think that your head is in the clouds because if you're thinking about a whole bunch of things but you don't seem like you're paying attention to that particular thing, then their assumption is that you're off with the ferries but you might be thinking about to you much more interesting things. And then what your friends think is that that can often come up with your friends think that you're bored by them or aren't interested in what they're saying and stuff like that. And you might be still paying attention to what they're saying but look like you're not because there are other things going on in your mind at the same time. So I just wanted to point that out because it was relevant to what you had said as well. And this would apply to, I'm guessing pretty well, everyone to some degree would have some kind of identification with this.


Yeah, that was it. It was just like who you are when you were diagnosed, why and what you found out. So that's perfect.


Thanks, Nadia. It's funny, I've had that experience when it comes to psychiatrists. I still see the same psychiatrist as I did when I lived in Sydney because it was so hard finding one in Melbourne. So, by the way, there are five more of you guys on Roxanne. Zoe J. Baker. No, that's probably not your first name. There will be some slides and then there will be a middle section. I figure since I'll be talking a bit faster, so it'll kind of break up the speed. If we get to you guys after I just jump through that first section. Is that all right? Cool. All right, guys, today, obviously just being an introduction, we're going to over the course, over the whole course. So in week one, we're going to what? We're just talking about understanding what it means to have ADHD, what it actually is and everything like that. And then in week two, we get into specific techniques that you can use to command your attention in the moment. And just as a short summary of that, basically, if we're Adrenalised, so there's literally access to physical adrenaline in our body. There's only one more step from adrenaline or epinephrine to Norepinephrine or noradrenaline, which is one of the neurotransmitter that are under regulated for ADHD.


And when we are Adrenalized, we can actually access more norepinephrine and therefore focus. And that can happen with the sense of high stakes or accountability, having other people around, setting up nonnegotiable deadlines for ourselves, getting other people involved, getting a friend or some friends to come over if we wanted to, say, clean the house so that then we have the stakes for the rest of the day to kind of get it done. Like, these can be really good things down that path. So the other one, apart from adrenalizing? Well, there are three one is genuine interest. So the degree of involuntary focus, that is focus that you place on whatever it is that you're genuinely interested in at that moment, involuntary focus is higher on average for people with ADHD, not lower. It's just that the voluntary focus, placing your attention on things that don't have a great deal of intrigue in them, this is more difficult. So sometimes and a lot of the message throughout this course really is about try differently. So rather than say, in the situation where you're trying to get focused, kind of get into it. So when I was doing these slides actually a couple of years ago now, before I started running the group in the first place, I had had a period earlier that year where I was really intently interested in all this kind of stuff because I had been recently diagnosed and I was looking all into it.


A few months later I was asked if I wanted to do this course. And at that time I was already hyper focusing and really interested in these other areas. So I had to pull my focus back into it. So if I had just taken a method like, say, using what I'll explain in a moment as the Pomodoro technique or something like that, to adrenalize myself or something, then that wouldn't have been as effective, or I was just trying to impose myself to do it. That wouldn't have been as effective as what I did do, which was to look at things that excited me about looking into ADHD again, till that genuine interest was pulled back into it. And then the amount of actual effort wasn't really substantial because I wanted to do it at that moment. So that's just an example of trying differently, which will come out throughout the course. So we've got adrenalizing, we've got genuine interest. And the other situation is.


Want to miss quote, basically, I don't want to miss quote, so I won't. But basically those two and a couple of other situations that we'll talk about, these are things that you can do regardless of your baseline when it comes to focus on things that you want to. You can do these in the moment to improve your ability to do so. And these can be applied through goalsetting to different aspects of your life, to what and how much to commit. So because the weeks four and five after that are going to be on moving toward and sticking to your goals. And we'll go quite into depth about how to make goals as conducive as possible to actually getting done. The commanding sorry to what and how much to commit is because for various reasons, people with ADHD are likely to have some kind of compensatory behavior like people pleasing, like doing things for other people and stuff like that. Or acquiescing saying yes and doing things that you might not have the time or resources to do, then spotting those times and intentionally thinking ahead and thinking, can I place the extra thing that I've got to do in there?


And then deciding on that basis what's actually most important to place in there and to set up as new goals versus what maybe seems more important because it's urgent but actually isn't as important. So we'll get into that kind of side of things before we do the goal setting, try to make it as relevant as possible when we do the goal setting and reflection thereof. And then jump in a week, in week six and seven, where we look at the baseline, so the healthy life, healthy lifestyle, healthy mind. And then this week we'll be looking at things like and specifically related to ADHD, but many of these things would be useful for the average person as well. You know, diet, consideration, sleep, which is likely to be an issue for people with ADHD more likely than the average person, and even mindfulness meditation, which can specifically train your ability to switch attention and retain your focus on things that aren't necessarily genuinely interesting. And then in weeks eight and nine, we get into a deeper look at the traumas and emotional considerations. So getting into anger and impulsive mistakes and looking at it from different angles in week eight and then in week nine, looking at the core beliefs like the peoplepleasing unrelenting standards and stuff like that, which may very well apply and the situations that spark them along, what causes the driver and how they can be diffused over time before we can just be a reflection and going over the various weeks.


Does anybody have any questions, anything they wanted to say about any of those things first? No? All right, so coming up today, we're going to get I mean, we've just done the kind of ice breaking for the most part of getting to know each other then. So I'll talk about what the Pomodoro technique is as a tool to help us all focus during these sessions and then how ADHD is defined. And that's where I talk about the initiative versus hyperactive and how they commingle common experiences and traits for people with ADHD. Which relates partly to that slide that I jumped ahead to earlier, but a couple of other ones. As well related to classroom criticism, the ability to hyperfocus under the right conditions or to focus on things that are genuinely interesting for a great deal of time and very intently drifting off in conversations as we've talked about. A bit already having a diagnosis undermined, which we've mentioned a little bit in passing, and how ADHD brains differ from the average brain in terms of developmental accelerations and delays. Different neurochemistry to some degree, and on a neuromechanical level as well. All right, so we've done the icebreaker, so I can jump ahead from this one.


So who's heard, just by show of hands of the Pomodoro technique before cool. So maybe about half of you guys have come across it before. There pomodoro is actually, I only found out fairly recently it's the word for tomato in Italian. And the reason why it's called that is because the whole idea is using an egg timer. Like it can be a tomato timer, which you're setting and then at that time making sure that you are as amped up as possible, you're keeping it down to a time limit so that it's possible to ramp yourself up during that time. And then you're going to set up apart from having the anchors to doing that kind of thing of what you hear of in the background from the egg timer and perhaps having the visual tomato timer on your desk, making sure it's a situation that is associated with as many things to do with adrenalizing as possible. Because basically, as I was mentioning before, adrenalizing is very helpful for people with ADHD to focus because it upregulates norepinephrine and this is a way to get Adrenalized. The way it works is just classical conditioning. So if you think of Pavlov's, work around behavioral conditioning, where, like, he's the guy who was famous for pairing the sound of a gong with the time at which the dogs that he had in his lab were going to be fed, and then they ended up salivating at the sound of a gong even when it was unpaired to the getting fed.


So salivating for a dog is an autonomic reflex when they expect to get fed because it's part of the digestive system. They can't just choose like, we can't just choose to get adrenaline. They can't choose to salivate at a given moment, but if it's associated with conditions under which they would normally salivate, then those associations will actually ramp them into gear to do that. And the same thing can work here with all of the associations that we have to do with the Pomodoro technique.


Like an egg timer, egg timer.


So we tend to associate that something fast like that with adrenaline in any way. But realistically, it could be anything that you start with. So, like, the first time you do the Pomotoro method, getting ramped up is more about the attitude, having a small amount of time, making sure that you set up so you can jump in and launch into it. But it's over time. Whatever you pair with that will end up being the marker down the track for being able to get you into mode.


That's all I was yeah, it's interesting that's often the kind of frame of mind that I've suggested two people compete against the last time, that kind of thing. In terms of using it in these sessions, it won't be like exactly 25 minutes at the start of each kind of jumping in and doing some slides. There will be the pomodoro will jump up, I'll say pomodoro time. And it's really just a way of like intermingling between talking quite quickly versus time, where we get to just relax and have a bit of conversation because that tends to be an easier situation of focusing for people with ADHD. All right, so inattentive versus hyperactivity. So I talked about this a bit. So the inotent of being easily distracted, easily distracted, potentially having trouble with organization. If you get distracted by something and potentially leave things behind and stuff like that, difficulty listening or that sense of drifting off and then you've got the presentation from the hyperactive side. So that can be tapping, having trouble sitting still, you know, rushing through tasks, making rash decisions. The reason why I go through these is I guess it's just essential to kind of have some idea of the diagnostic criteria anyway.


But when you look at those characteristics of the hyperactive presentation, you can see that, I mean, really just they're an acted out presentation of what's going on underneath the people with the inattentive, because there's a higher requirement for external stimulation, as I mentioned before, to focus on one thing to the exclusion of all else. So then if someone is a slow talker or monotonous or something is not that interesting, then you get that easily distracted as a person is thinking about other things at once because their focus isn't fully drawn into one thing. Being disorganized, as I said, that can be because you forget things because you focus on something else. It also can be because you really don't want to do a boring or a task that doesn't seem meaningful. So then you rush it. And that rushing makes it more likely that you'll make mistakes or miss something out in terms of organization. But then the tapping and not sitting still and stuff like that. Well, people with ADHD are likely to do some sort of fiddling or tapping and stuff like that, more than the average person in attendance presentation anyway. And it's because there's even research to show that when people use fidget spinners or even they tap and stuff like that.


For many people with ADHD, that can improve their ability to focus on one thing to the exclusion of all else because it's filling up some of that attention window without fully dragging them into another area of focus. The rushing through tasks I mentioned and then the making rash decisions. Well, I mean, the impulsive behavior is a characteristic of ADHD, inattentive or not. So I just wanted to make that point that that's to me why they still call it the same thing. Even though the presentation might seem quite different in attentive is just an acted out version in some sense of the sorry, the hyperactive is just an act out version in some sense of the inattentive. Now, the classroom experience, it's a really important one because it applies in my experience to pretty much everybody with ADHD to some extent tends to be a very, very strong driver for shame or guilt or feeling bad about things that you struggle with if you only try it as hard as other kids. That interpretation that teachers might have of the fluctuating ability that you present with on a day to day basis thinking, how do they just stay interested the whole time?


Particularly not being diagnosed as a child, then seeing, not having any idea, no explanation that is different to the teachers thinking that it's actually just due to laziness or something like that can be really problematic. I do care. This is me trying or even later down the track, convincing ourselves that we don't care. So that it negates the need to see that vulnerability, to see that there is something that you're trying to do better in coming up short in some way and then you're so lazy part. I don't know whether any of you guys who seen The Nutty Professor the Absent Minded Professor, I think that might be. Yeah, The Nutty Professor is an Eddie Murphy movie anyway. So this picture of Williams, Robin Williams, it was just a brain. Yes, he was in this movie, he was this kind of like well, the Absent wine professor, he would get really caught up into his work. He was a genius. But then he was in love with this girl who he kept on letting down because you'd get caught up into his work and stuff like that. I put that there because if you watch the movie, that's ADHD and given that it was made in like the early 90s or eighty s, I bet you they didn't know that.


So I've talked about the involuntary versus voluntary focus, hyper focus and losing time. So people with ADHD often feel that they have a poor perception of time. And I mean, we gain the perception of the monitoring of time by checking in on it. So then when we look back with hindsight and remember a time, then if we've checked in less because we were fully focused on one thing in particular, or there was enough time that passed where our focus didn't relent, enough to allow checking into what time it was and how much time has passed has become relevant, then you're likely to remember it as being a smaller amount of time. It's what we call trance. Now this can be built upon, right? Like if we intentionally note the time that we start something and then the end time, and then where we're necessarily taking that information and predicting getting an idea for the amount of time it's going to take next time and adjusting that based on I thought it was going to take me an hour. It took me half an hour. I thought it was going to whatever it is, then of course we're going to build that ability to detect how much time things take as well as anyone else.


But to get a head start, it can be useful to set alarms for the end times as well as the start time, and even to be really decisive about the moments that we choose to do activities that don't have an end point. So, like, there are several people who I've spoken to, with ADHD, for example, who talk about, you know, they're always late to staff. I talk to them about what their process is in the morning and there'll be something like scanning their social media on their phone or something like that, that intentionally doesn't have an end point that they do in the morning and without, like, a start and end time, that's likely then to pull you in to the point that time passes and you're not realizing it. So there are different kinds of ways of when does it happen, what do I do, how do I lose track, how can I avoid that next time? I talked about training lifestyle to do with the week six and seven now the Medicare Belinda, so you're still muted.


Yes, and that's where it does become quite situational. What I was referring to mainly there is the idea that a lot of people know who have ADHD, that they don't know how much time things take. So that can be rectified and figured out over time in terms of losing track or realizing that sometimes. You'll be in the mode and be able to focus on those things, maybe even if they're not particularly interesting. But other times you'll really struggle get stuck too. Yeah. So there are a couple of reasons that that can happen and generally, I guess, a combination of a couple of them, but certainly ADHD or not, the more averse of a task is for any reason, the more we're going to want to avoid it. And it could be aversive because it was unpleasant last time, it could be aversive because we don't expect to do well in it or anything like that. So that can still be there. But even without that, if we've done exercise that day, that's the other one of those three commanding your focus. By the way it's exercise occurred to me now. So if we exercise that day where that's going to upregulate Norepinephrine and dopamine so, then those situations you might find easier to focus, or a situation where the stakes are higher or there's more accountability that other people would know, or you'd be letting someone down if you didn't do it then and there.


Having an absolute deadline can be a useful good thing. Situations like, say, doing our tax can be really challenging because there's no absolute deadline where, like, you have to do it at a given time, so it can end up being tomorrow never comes type thing and different ones will come up as we go. But like, yeah, there definitely are these different reasons for it. But the situation, given that you've experienced a situation where you can focus sometimes, once we identify what it is about that situation that is different from the other, then you should be able to take advantage of that more willingly just by being aware of and being able to mimic it. And I've just got there. So medication, just talking about the different types of medication. So the way that it works I've mentioned is that it up regulates both the neurotransmitter dopamine and Norepinephrine that are under regulated for people with ADHD dopamine. I think I've got a section on I'm going to jump back, but I think I've got a slide on it. Okay, here we are. I may as well just go to the main slide when I'm talking about this section.


So the Norepinephrine, this is related, as I was saying, to decision consolidation. This is the one that you can get more access to any time you're adrenaline. So the Pomodoro technique and stuff like that. And it means that because in the last minute, when something does have an absolute deadline or you're going to let someone down, if you don't do something that the stakes feel higher, that can adrenalize us to an upfront extent often so that we can get stuff done. It's also worth noting that if you've got two days on the weekend to do something that's going to take half a day, not only is it very common that people with ADHD will leave it to the last half of Sunday, but you might find that you're not actually able genuinely to focus on it until that time. Because it's only at that time that you are adrenalized and therefore able to convert your priorities to just that task, before which it can be very difficult without a very specific strategy like we've been talking about. Don't mean, of course, being related to the reward system. Now when we either achieve something that we see is better than expected or something happens to us that's better than expected, then we're going to get a spike in dopamine and a suppression of dopamine if something is worse than expected.


But when dopamine is underregulated as it is for people with ADHD, all else being equal, then the spike is smaller and the suppression is greater. So the intrinsic feeling of achievement for people with ADHD tends to be smaller than the average person. So less kind of like internal celebration of achieving a productivity tasks and stuff like that. And the suppression is greater when we don't live up to our expectations. Meaning that that intrinsic feeling of oh crap, that didn't feel very good, that is stronger as well. General activity and the drive for stimulation because there's a higher requirement for external stimulation. People with ADHD tend to seek out novel situations where there's more stimulation, more kind of more access to potential dopamine and also seek out more stimulation. If something is boring, we tend to think of something else. At the same time. The interior cingulate cortex or ACC is an area of the brain about here that is related to slowing down enough so that we're able to do something in a different way. So when the stakes are high, like, let's say that if you're driving a car really fast versus driving slowly, so then the stakes seem higher in the sense that if you crash, it's worse, right?


In that situation where the interior cingulate cortex would be active in order to make us slow down, in order to decide whether we want to do things differently because the stakes are higher. Now the dorsal at the prefrontal cortex, this is another part of the brain that is smaller and has less connections to people with ADHD. All else being equal. Both of these areas of the brain, by the way, can be built up so that's related specifically to selfcontrol or inhibitory control. And the combination of the interior cingulate cortex and endorseltic prefrontal cortex being smaller on average is that relationship with self control and the tendency to have even a higher emotional volume to move forward. There's less inhibition relative to the amount of forward push there is for a person with ADHD. Loss being equal. Just jumping back to where I was and then we can show for a little bit I know that was a lot. And meet the top one for me is Zoe.


And I mean, generally speaking, for people who probably have ADHD but don't necessarily want to take the medication and aren't, like studying where they might be able to get some special exemption or something, I wouldn't necessarily suggest that they should go and get a formal diagnosis unless it's important to them for some reason. Because on a practical level, those are the main things. It's usually access to medication or access to special considerations, but actually, like the practical gain of having that. But it can be really important for people just to have the kind of the headspace, the understanding that they're not alone. They're the only people in that boat, for sure. Thanks, Zoe. Next person that I've got on my screen is Cass. Is that the right way to say it?


Yeah, great. Thanks, Cass. Yeah. I can understand not getting people to pronounce it. I have a friend of mine called Jorge, I think is the right pronunciation. And he's just like, Call me George, you guys. He'd rather hear people say that then get it wrong.


The next person I have here is John.


It was great.


So it's interesting that you note some changes though. So was that after realizing that you had ADHD or starting to take Dextroenthetamine and maybe just like, you know, I guess adjusting or readjusting to a new paradigm or was there something more to it? Noting that I realize we're in a group, I'm asking the question.


Which.


Novelty seeking, by the way, and low risk aversion. I'd certainly trace for a lot of people with ADHD.


Well, it sounds like you're very much ready to kind of make use out of this process. So probably good timing in terms of getting that running start when you're in that mode. Plus, I mean, the more teachers we have who know what ADHD is in full detail, the better.


Yeah, like just even like the cultural kind of rubbing off on other teachers so they understand that maybe it's not a terrible thing would be so handy so that they aren't treating it like it's something that it's not and therefore kind of sending the implicit idea to the kids that that's the case. Yeah.


Yeah, absolutely. Rather than things can be so much better in that classroom level. I remember when I was I thought about it just the other day, like, why maybe what worked out well and what worked out not so well when it came to primary school and the way that people treated things. I think I realized, and this is literally in the last week, I realized there was probably missed in terms of diagnosis of ADHD in fairly large part because there was a lot of kind of talk about being gifted and stuff. And then, so with that, they're like, oh, he's getting bored with this material. We'll give him more material that's like higher up. And it's like that's exactly perfect for somebody with ADHD. Right. So that kind of thing worked out really well until I got to whatever grade and I'd kind of read all the books and then I started getting less interested in schooling. But that kind of thing can happen to people, whether it's either something that really, really imperfect or really kind of, as it happens, quite perfect for their situation.


Alrighty, guys, so I think we've just got one more. Roxanne, I can't just hear you yet. Roxanne doesn't say you muted. What would that be? If you can hear me, Roxanne, on the bottom left hand corner of the screen, there should be a little mic. And if you click the arrow next to that, you should be able to select the default mic. Don't worry, I use them every day and still have issues sometimes. That's okay. We'll get to you next time. If that's all right. Just okay, no worries today, guys. We probably won't get through every single bit of the content, but that's okay. It'll take me like five minutes to go through it next time. It's only really the first session that's really kind of pressed for time because I know that it's really important and useful for people to get to know one another in this group. And it just takes a bit of time to kind of go through that. In the future, it won't be so kind of push for content, but I'll just go through a little bit more. I've got a couple more minutes left. This next little pomodoro session.


So the dopamine norepinephrine anterior singular cortex and what not to do with the brain. I've gone through social developmental delay. So the motor cortex, which is a slice about here through the brain and controls our muscle movement. This tends to, all else being equal, develop a bit faster for people with ADHD, which might just be because people with the mixed or hyperactive presentation maybe move more around it's. Not know exactly why, but we certainly do see that association. And also that even though there are a couple areas of the brain the dorsalota prefrontal cortex and interior cingula cortex that still end up being a bit smaller. All else being equal for people with ADHD as they get older, the prefrontal cortex in general develops a bit later for people with ADHD, but by the time by the time they're mid teenagers, that's already caught up. And that's fine. It's just that that can actually be related to a bit of bullying. So the combination of, like, around mid to late primary school years in particular, the combination of potentially not being as sophisticated socially as some of your peers because of that delay of the prefrontal cortex and understanding social situations.


Combined with the tendency to get really caught up in and fascinated in your own ideas and potentially talk to the point that people are drooling. These two things can lead to a bit of bullying earlier on, which can be related to the way that we see ourselves in social situations down the track. Getting distracted and leaving, getting lost in your own thoughts, not realizing people are talking, doing silly things to get attention, failing to think about consequences. These are all the kind of things that can get people socially into trouble. And then just that very next section. As I said, it won't take me long just to go through that next time. Are there any questions or anything that anybody wanted to say before we finished up today? Oh, I actually did get through all the content. Awesome. I thought that was a bit behind.


Yes.


True. We can come up with a different kind of plan for that kind of situation as well. Honestly, anytime somebody tells me that they're having trouble with focusing on something, I'll always drill in to see the kind of situation because the Pomodoro technique doesn't work very well for lateral thinking tasks that aren't linear. Like, it's really, really good for things that you do well. Like basically, you know how it's done, you know, filling out a form or something like that. It's not going to be a struggle where you've got to think about all the possibilities and kind of nodded out in that way. If a task is like that, Pomodoro technique isn't going to work very well, generally speaking, when they've done studies on incentivizing people or punishing people to work on how productive they can be. And this is just related to ADHD, but they find that the more they incentivize or punish, the more the stakes seem to have, the more adrenalised they are. So we can kind of get an idea for what happens when people are adrenalised through that. And what happens is that people get better at linear tasks, but they get worse at lateral thinking tasks.


So harnessing something else, like the intrigue, the genuine interest in something that's more lateral based would be more helpful and just in general, just kind of looking into the exact situation and thinking, right, well, what could I do differently overall that's going to best relate to it? We will go through all the different methods throughout this course and then it'll just be a matter of saying, all right, so that applies to this, that applies to this. This one will be most conducive. Righty. Rue guys. Well, lovely to meet you all. I will get to know you next time. Roxanne as well. Thanks very much. I'll see you in week two.

Other
Alexander, will you tell us more about Norepinephrine?


Sure. What would you like to know about it?


From last time, because I mentioned it a few times. So Norepinephrine is one of the neurotransmitter that is under regulated for people with ADHD. All else being equal, generally speaking, it's one of the three major excitatory neurotransmitter next to Dopamine. So you've got Dopamine, Norepinephrine, and Serotonin, the three major excitatory neurotransmitter.


No. So primarily, Dopamine and Norepinephrine are the two neurotransmitter that are reliably under regulated for people with ADHD. That being said, and that's why, by the way, the stimulant medication only focuses on the Norepinephrine and the Dopamine. But there are people with ADHD who benefit from taking an SSRI or something like that that is designed to enhance Serotonin, but not because of ADHD. That could be because they had a low mood or OCD or anxiety or something like that that developed, which may have been related to ADHD, but obviously is there regardless.


Yes.


Priority convergence.


So if you think of having many priorities that are all important. So, like, this is a situation for people with ADHD, like the things on your desk, the other programs are open on your computer, the other people maybe in the environment, if you're in a restaurant, maybe the people at the other tables having conversations that you can hear might pull your attention. So these are all options within that kind of list of the possible things to interact with at that moment when we funnel that down. So this happens when we're Adrenalised or when we need to get focused and get something specifically done. We naturally give up our lateral thinking, our ability to kind of think about things in different kinds of creative ways and stuff like that, temporarily in order to really funnel down and just get one thing done. And that happens when we have higher Norepinephrine, which happens to people with ADHD as well. We've all experienced it when there's an absolute emergency, when things are just kind of going crazy and you have to just kind of go for it and do it.


So at the moment that you make a decision, and this can be a conscious decision, I decide that I'm going to do this work. So therefore, it is utilized at the moment of my decision, having a spike there to converge my priorities. But also it's worth noting that people have a spike of Norepinephrine when they when they make decisions about all sorts of things. I remember I volunteered like just one or two times off kind of thing in a primary school years ago, where it was a program designed to get kids interested in science. And I was utilizing the fact that there's a pretty good correlation between pupil dilation and Norepinephrine bikes, all else being equal, like lighting conditions and stuff like that. So you can actually see it pupil will dilate or get bigger when you have that spike of Norepinephrine and you can catch it in the moment. So I got them to play Scissors, Paper, Rock with one another, and they were able to be considerably better at chance, which is good for kids that are aged like grade one and two. It was about twothirds of the time that they were able to get to accuracy where they were.


I would get them to choose at the moment, like scissors, paper, rock at the moment that they say it, the one that they choose, they decide. So, like scissors, paper on them, in my head, I decide paper. They do it at that moment. And the person is looking at their eyes, they will see at the moment when they make the decision, they will see the pupil dilation a little bit. And because of that, they can utilize that to be like right. Norepinephrine spiked. They made the decision at that moment.


And also those ballerina things that can be speed either way, depending on your perspective, or like, you've got visual puzzles that there's not enough data to see whether it's embedded or outbedded or something like that.


Yeah. So any kind of ambiguous visual events based on the way that our visual system works at the moment that we see it spinning in a particular direction, there's a spike of Norepinephrine. And the bigger that spike is, the harder it is to pull out of that and see it going the other direction.


So it keeps us in there in a way that's actually hard to pull out as well. If you have a big spike that.


It does. Like, it is actually a sacrifice because the strength of people with ADHD that kind of opposes that is about lateral thinking coming up with creative solutions for things often. Right. So you're able to do that when you're lateral thinking. But when people get really kind of pinned down to an Adrenalized or they've got plenty of Norepinephrine, then they tend to be they do better at linear tasks where you know what to do, but they actually do worse at lateral thinking based tasks. So the baseline of people with ADHD being a bit lower means it's a bit more conducive to lateral thinking and thinking in that mode versus just kind of funneling in and getting stuff done in a linear way.


Serotonin has several roles. So, like, we know, for example, that if I mean, it's heavily related to mood, as in well, actually more than mood directly. It's related to confidence, safety, if evolutionarily speaking. So, like, tribal days, right? If people had scarce resources and not everybody may get fed at that time, and potentially there's danger. Like, you've got to you know, if you hear a loud noise, you've got to react to it because that might actually be something seriously dangerous. Those types of situations where you have to be highly strong or competitive with other people lead to low serotonin. And people with low serotonin are they feel less connected, more individualistic. They tend to, like they're more competitive. They tend to be successful because of the competitiveness, all else being equal, compared with people who are really naturally high in serotonin. People who are really high in serotonin are like perfect neighbors, really kind, lovely, empathetic people, but they tend not to have a crazy amount of kind of unnecessary job success, one could put it, because they don't really mind. They're not that competitive. They're not trying to get themselves ahead of another person because the sense is we've got enough for everyone.


So you don't have resource, fruitful environment.


Linked to drive or motivation, or is serotonin linked to drive? Yeah, I wouldn't say that any neurotransmitter itself is primarily drive related, but yes, serotonin is certainly heavily related to drive, where people take the medications that are used to alter serotonin levels specifically. So these are called SSRIs. They're the primary one that's used SSRI standing for selective Serotonin reuptake inhibitor. I can get into the reason why it's called a reuptake inhibitor, but the main thing is that it doesn't create extra serotonin, but it moves it around more. So we're using more of what's there. And when that happens, people tend to not experience their stress. Resilience goes up. They're not as bothered by things. Their sleep goes like, people have higher dream recall, deeper sleep and stuff like that. When they have higher serotonin. So their sleep often improves as well. They notice that things don't make them as mad and stuff like that, in the sense of being able to emotionally feel things and express yourself rather than having just like do you know what I mean? Like not having a reactive face or something like that. People are more emotionally engaging when generally speaking, when they're on the higher side of serotonin.


You can manipulate that. When you think of for anyone we won't necessarily discuss it, but for anyone who has experimented with recreational drugs such as psychedelics, like LSD acid as its street name, or psilocybin in mushrooms, and all of the primary psychedelics that are named so are actually serotonin mimicers. So they are similar enough in part to the molecular structure of serotonin that some so a subset of the serotonin receptor sites will bind to that as though it's serotonin. And so the effect that people have when they take these things, they tend to be the threshold for seeing a connection between two things is lowered. But that can be so low that you see a connection when it's not there. So that can be problematic in terms of over certainty, but it can be like you're spotting connections all over the place. You're feeling famously, Steve Jobs actually talks about taking micro doses of I think it was LSD, either psilocybin, but one of those, and I think was LSD to intentionally reduce that threshold a bit so that he would, like, explore an idea and then to kind of check whether that idea worked still when he's sober.


But the whole idea was that he notices things that he wouldn't necessarily notice or connect together when he's taken that, just as an idea of the subjective experience of it. I haven't done the intro yet. We just started chatting.


Like I was talking about last time you were here last week. Yeah, yeah. So I was talking about the fact that most of the neurotransmitter and things like that, that our body has these don't come from our food. They're created through these chemical processes inside our body that come from constituents of our food. And we're catalyzed by proteins specifically and stuff like that. But so the chemical process that makes up Norepinephrine, which is under regulated for people with ADHD, and is crucially important to be able to focus on one thing to the exclusion of all else, to just kind of funnel those priorities. And because it's only one more step, you got epinephrine or adrenaline, and then the next step is Norepinephrine. So then when we actually have access, our body is Adrenalized, which can be released, obviously, outside of the brain, that can cross the blood brain barrier. We have access to Norepinephrine at that time. So you think of, like, the last minute effect. You got high accountability, a gun to your head, like situations where the stakes are high enough that you have to act at that moment. They tend not to be an issue for people with ADHD.


I've always said, like, if you put a gun to someone's head with ADHD and get them to do their tax, they will actually be able not only will they do it because they don't want to get shot. They will be able to do it where they may not have been able to do it without the gun point at their head.


That'S not a strategy I'm suggesting. All right, I'll just kind of jump into the main part of the session, and then we'll have more breaks where we can chat and stuff like that. Guys, so this week is on commanding your attention. So those specific strategies that you can use in the moment, that a conducive, particularly for people with ADHD to be able to focus in those times. So what I was talking about, of course, is highly related to this. Just jumping back to last session. Did anyone explain I didn't actually read the last slide last session because I was like, I just got there. But the question was going to be like, take a couple of these strategies and use them to better explain ADHD to someone in your life who knows it better. I don't know whether anyone caught that, but even if that wasn't a specific homework task that was there, did anyone take any of the knowledge from last week and utilize it to explain it better to anyone they know? It's okay because I didn't even ask you to. I was just curious if you did. When I started learning, when I was confident that I knew enough about ADHD, like, that was when I was okay with telling my dad, who I fully expected, not to think it was a good idea or believe that there was any utility in it.


And I was right. But that's okay. At least I could explain it. Well, he's 70. You can imagine. He basically said he said, Try not to over medicalized things, son. This is a generational gap that I imagine that many people are kind of dealing with when it comes to explaining this to some of the older people in their life.


You mean dopamine.


Yeah. And to be fair, I think that the flippant kind of response that I said that I got from my dad. It was fine. I think what he was trying to say was like, don't label yourself in a way that limits you and I completely agree with that for myself and anyone else not to allow the notion that you have ADHD to be a reason in your mind not to be able to do anything. There are things that would be particularly hard for people with ADHD like doing a PhD because it's such a long drawn out thing that you have to self monitor a great deal but I have come across people with PhDs with ADHD all the power to them. There are certain situations that are going to be easier for people with ADHD or not, but we definitely shouldn't stop ourselves from trying things like to me, it is a useful construct to understand ourselves a bit better and to realize that we're not alone in this world where it's only 1% of people or something like that. So it's worth having a label so that you can spot them because people with ADHD are really fun to chat with, I feel.


I would suggest so. I think of the friends that I have and I'm like musicians and people who live in their vans and rock climb it's going to be higher likelihood in those people. When you have a high novelty seeking band, which is very common for people with ADHD because of the underregulation of dopamine, that can also lead itself through experience over time to a lower aversiveness to risk as well. So then that can separate you from some other individuals who haven't gone through that and don't have that kind of lower dopamine level and find more interesting people who are coming up with ideas all over the place that might spark your interest and stuff.


There could be a bit of that too. I think that it's definitely partly that thing of being drawn to people because of interest and stuff but certainly when it comes to primary relationships, it's not always the case. In fact, it's something that I've worked with several people on if they several clients in particular have come to see me where the primary issue that I've identified underneath it all is actually in their relationship. They found somebody who was basically the polar opposite to them because they had traits that they admired, because they were the opposite reflection of what they were ashamed of not possessing. They were with this person who also valued those traits and they did what they could early in the relationship to make up for these challenges. But naturally it's going to show itself at some point. So then it just led to higher and higher shame about what was going on. So then like, how do you work back up to having a good relationship with somebody who I'm like? It's a challenging conversation to have with a client because what do you pick her if it wasn't based on shame? And is it the right partner for him?


But that's not a useful conversation to have when you got three kids together necessarily.


Yeah, there will be a particular session in week eight. Weeks eight and nine are particularly about this kind of stuff. So earlier on in what you were saying no, no, but I still give a bit of description now. But earlier on what you were saying about handling temper and stuff like that, where that may be a challenge, but also then you're talking about sensitivities to particular things. Now it's worth noting that with those kind of sensitivities I found that my guess would be that it's not characteristic of ADHD because I see people who clearly don't possess that at all, although it's very common. But if you think about the experiences that are likely, that are likely for people with ADHD to experience, then the characteristics of ADHD in this society are likely to lead to the traumas that make those sensitivities. So and I talk about the particular areas and more specifically in week nine, but the most common one to see, and I see it in the majority of people with ADHD that I come across, so this would be a sensitivity around the possibility of failure. So because of that experience of being told that your fluctuating application of your ability early in school is actually because you're lazy or because you're not interested in stuff like that, and then either holding on to the idea that you're lazy because it's not incapable, but then still having in the back of your mind that it's actually due to an incapability because you have really tried and you're still being told that so in some way you're not meeting the Mark.


And then because it wasn't predictable and you couldn't rectify it, there's a sense of inevitability there because when you can't predict it, you can't predict the absence of it either. So then you're kind of like always expecting and waiting for this thing. And when we consider something like that more likely, and it's foundationally hard to deal with because we do care about our capability for various reasons, that it increases the size of the threat in a sense. And the bigger the threat in any kind of situation, the more we have to defend ourselves. If there's a physical threat, like somebody is picking a fight, but I don't know, a child is picking a fight with you or something like that, you don't have to get all revved up and get prepared to fight back. But if it's somebody like a huge seven foot guy, then different story, just as kind of putting it down to the physical it's the most way, but it's the same thing, right? Like if somebody gives me criticism, the idea is, and I don't have that sense, that I'm inevitably going to fail, I don't believe that, then I'm like, okay, so I've got that criticism, what can I do with that?


And to think about all the various reasons that have led to them coming up with those particular, hopefully constructive ideas. But if I hear that and I've got this idea that I'm inevitably going to fail, and I've done all of this work over the years to make sure that that doesn't happen, and I have made sure in my mind that that's not me. But it's kind of like a defensive layer, because I believe that it could be the case at any time. Then I'm going to be much more sensitive and want to defend myself and convince a person, even get them to admit that they were wrong about the criticisms. So therefore I could be okay and believe that I didn't deserve those criticisms, that I wasn't incapable in the way that I thought that that suggested. That makes sense. And there are other ones related to different areas, but we'll get there in that week. All right, guys, we've got a bit of time. Let's get a couple of people just to say what's your most mundane thing that you have to do on a regular basis? Either for work or life admin or something like that?


Like for me in my job, for example, because people usually have things, parts of their job they're like pretty conducive to ADHD. They work pretty well for them. So for me it's like this presenting or being in front of somebody one to one and having a conversation, there's enough accountability to pull me in, there's enough desire to do well so that I can help someone. But then I'm writing a letter to a GP. If I were a betting man, I would guess that maybe 10% of red and that's hard to convince myself to do versus send someone a letter and then I get one back and there's a conversation for you guys. What are the things that are hardest or the thing that's hardest to motivate yourself to do on a regular basis? This.


Marking? Yeah. So you got this stack of them in what years do you teach?


Okay, right, yeah. So they could be all sorts of things. What do you think it is about marking? Just because it's linear, there's no complication, there's no challenge. Once you've marked one, it's all repetition.


Are you friends with any of the other teachers there? Or any other teachers who do marketing? So one of the things that we're going to mention today will be having other people around in the environment that can be like you're talking about to kind of like if you just kind of planned a day where you got a bunch of marking, you go and do it and make a game out of it with another team.


But any markers you could find them potentially like online and stuff like that? There are plenty of people who do marketing, actually. Anyone can sign like one of your friends who even a teacher, I think could sign up to do marking and they just get paid per paper, don't they.


For me? No, to do some marking. Like you can sign up to do some marketing and get a stack of stuff. Maybe I'm wrong, maybe they have to be taken. No work looking into some ideas so that you could set up. Like, if you were to race, like, you got like the same amount in your pile each and you're like, right, ratio. That's exactly perfect. Because it's a linear task. There's no complication to it. So it doesn't matter if you're going quickly like that, as long as you're not like, rushing too much to the point of mistakes. And so, like, the Pomodoro actions on that kind of thing. Alright, who else has got the most mundane thing that they've got to do on a regular basis?


Yeah. To be completely honest, my life is like just like it's just an evolving stack. I'll occasionally get it down, but I'm not doing it each day.


And it's only because it's not read right. Like, if I was sending a letter to somebody who like, was going to respond or was going to be helped by the letter or something, that's totally different. You know, it's going to be useful. But it's because you don't get a reply to GP letters and they're just like, you know, some people read them.


And you get the occasional one who like, literally just reads all of that stuff and they really I love it.


Yeah. All right, you guys, let's see if we can help with those modernities to some degree. So remember, in the future we're going to talk about the ways to improve baseline performance. This is just regardless of our baseline for particular tasks, if we can pick the right one. And these techniques can be useful. So a reminder of the Pomodoro technique and in more detail because it's about utilizing it specifically in your own time. So 25 minutes timer, that time isn't particularly important. It is a researched amount of time that they find is kind of ideal outside of that time. So longer wouldn't be ideal because it'd be too much time generally to stay really intently focused in an intentional way like that to get adrenaline that entire time to use this kind of technique. You could do shorter, but I wouldn't do any longer. Unless if you are doing it and you. Got into a hyper focus kind of mode, then there's no problem continuing. You can get plenty done there and it can be really productive. But I've seen situations in the past running this actually where people will try to apply this, but they know in the back of their mind that they're going to get to the end of the 25 minutes and they're going to keep on going because they've got more stuff.


And so like they don't truly have permission from themselves that they will just do the 25 minutes. And because of that they procrastinate with starting. We don't want the minimum journey to be too far. Or it's like standing at the base of Mount Everest, looking up and thinking that's a really big mountain, no thanks. So, yeah, keeping it small and manageable and bite size in a state that you can or an amount of time that you can stay rentalized for committing to the time in advance, setting up your desk, if that's wherever the workspace is that you're doing it on so that everything's ready to go. You got the plan. All you have to do is jump in and do it. So there's no kind of thinking about that process while you do it. But you want to have, like, a very small amount of time just to kind of set things up so I can close down all the other programs on your computer, open up everything to do with that, maybe even chunk in some copied and pasted data. Even if it's not going to even be in the end result, if it's some relevant stuff that you can condense or something like that, then it's a way then of like you open up the blank page and you're less likely to get distracted because you get okay, there's some text there.


What is that? It's relevant. Pulls me in good. Instead of there's a blank page completely. That's really boring. What else is there? Like wasting yourself like someone was saying last week and trying to make it faster than the last time or that you are focusing more intently than last time or act like a moment is too late. Any of these kind of ideas are associated with urgency, are ideal for this someone to say something? No. All right, chill between go for a walk, exercise, something like that. Alright. adrenalising the system. Okay, the last minute effect. So the brain on adrenaline and what happens and we have talked about this stuff, we get that narrowed focus, we make strong decisions to the point that we're very sure we stick in. That involves priority convergence. So we get that one thing done and that priority convergence. The last minute pattern, which is very common for people with ADHD. It's one of the kind of the classic things that I'll ask when I'm interviewing somebody who's interested in seeing whether they have ADHD is first I'll generally ask are you better at assignments or tests. Some people are actually better at assignments because they get really, really nervous about tests and that can relate to other experiences I've had.


But generally speaking, more so than not, people with ADHD are better with the exam side of things, where the pressure is on, but the assignments and the readings consistently over time, not so much. And perhaps studying more toward the end rather than consistently approaching it all throughout the session, unless you've got a really kind of rigorous plan to do so. Because at that time, that's when you're adrenalized, that's when you have access to Norepinephrine. And creating that last minute effect is something that can be done by, like, setting up, say, if you've got a friend who you do an edit for every now and then, and they do an edit of something you've written every now and then, setting up a time and saying, all right, can I send you my paper tomorrow? So then you've got an idea, like you want to do as much as you can so it's as useful as possible before you actually send it to them. Or even like if you were doing a PhD and you had a supervisor to set up a nonnegotiable deadline that you see in a certain amount so you could decide and actually set a date with your supervisor, if that was a situation.


For example, to actually have dates where you have the intro, the method, the conclusion, that kind of thing, you're piecemealing it a bit so you don't just get such a massive unsupervised set of work. So non negotiable deadlines, pomodoro and getting revved up. And also it's worth noting that exercise I may have mentioned in the past, about 30 minutes of high intensive cardio exercise, leads to a two hour window in which people with ADHD have up regulated their Norepinephrine endopley into such a degree that it doesn't actually differ, all else being equal to the average person. So, very, very handy to do exercise in the morning before you want to kind of get going and focus. And what I've found as well, particularly because sleep is often an issue for people with ADHD, is that more exercise than the average person is required to get the most out of it. Like most people, they can get good sleep and stuff like that with, say, this amount of exercise. But doing more for people with ADHD still continues to have a positive effect in my experience, and a really beneficial one in terms of being less inclined to do those, to get in that mode where you feel bored, where you feel like nothing's really that interesting, to lose momentum with things.


And also, particularly if it's in the morning, like I said, the ability to adrenalize and feel good about accomplishments throughout the day to some degree. Anybody have any questions about any of that before I jump into the slide?


Yes.


I see. Okay, so certainly adrenaline is heavily related to the nervous system. So in terms of our primary nervous system running down the spinal cord, you think of the parasympathetic nervous system being related to dearousal and the sympathetic nervous system related to getting revved up. When we get more Adrenalised, that signals for our body to get more revved up and that will do a bunch of different things all at once as though there's a fight flight situation. And that even happens when we're just getting Adrenalized because we're nervous and stuff like that. It's worth noting, though, with adrenaline fatigue, like you're talking about, generally speaking, where people get revved up adrenalized, even if it's quite highly revved up, as long as they get a chance to get fully down. So they're not. Kind of staying a little bit open, like you've got like a touch on the gas pedal kind of thing, then that situation is very unlikely to lead to adrenaline fatigue. It tends to be from it's when people are they get revved up and then they go down to there. They don't go down all the way, so they constantly got some degree of adrenaline.


But of course that would be something worth talking about with your psychiatrist if you're interested in taking stimulant medication or if you already do, because all of the baseline sympathetic arousal is going to be higher with either of the stimulant medications because of Norepinephrine dry mouth. That's something that occurs for people if they take a lot of Dextro amphetamine generally. And this is because salivation is part of the digestive system and the digestive system takes heaps of energy to run. And that's one of the key areas from which energy is taken to send to the bigger muscles in the arms and legs. So you can fight for your life or run for your life when you're really Adrenalized. That even happens when you're just like angry, but not physically active. But yeah, to the exclusion of the stomach. So it means that kind of stuff. You get less activity, less movement in the gut, less acid production where people have anxiety. So it is staying open, albeit they're not calming down over time. Part of what people get with adrenaline fatigue is they're using resources that are fine to use in bursts, but they're just not meant to be constantly used.


We're not meant to be in a constant state of partial adrenaline. Does that help at all?


Yeah, at this stage, you probably wouldn't lean into that immediately. I do have a technique that I'll suggest for you, by the way, but once you get a handle on that, it would probably still become a useful strategy because that way you open up, you have a burst for 25 minutes, then you chill out. The system is fine with that, but when you're already kind of revved up and that's already an issue that hasn't already that hasn't been sorted yet, then it wouldn't make sense to jump into that. Sorry, guys, I think that my title is coming through, but we're getting there.


You can get into the patent easily of being adrenalised at certain times, because that's the opposite of the impact that you have on your body by drinking at that time. For example, a lot of people, like, if we take over something that should happen without some sort of aid and it's a specific external aid, then we will, over time, lose the ability to do it ourselves. That's one of the main reasons why people get really addicted to cannabis. Like, not so much that they're addicted in the same way as Opiates, that their whole body itches and feels terrible when they know it's more that they often smoke weed to go to sleep, to chill out at the end of the day. Kind of similar to what you're saying with alcohol, but then they become reliant on cannabis to get to sleep. So when they try not to have it, they probably don't sleep properly for maybe a solid week or something like that. And that's going to really increase the amount that they're going to want to get the weed. But the thing is, our natural body's response at the end of the day, to destress, to kind of do that auto regulation.


So like self regulation, that process is being taken over, I guess, by the sounds of it, by the drinking. Yeah. So it's just worth noting that, like, minimizing, crutches, minimizing anything that you don't need to need, but is always a good idea. But at the same time, there are plenty of times where I'll have a coffee, say, and I might have the idea, like, yep, this will wake me up. I'm still going to have days off sometimes without coffee. So it's also kind of proving to me that I can function without it. It's not required. But you still realize that it's a benefit for the reliance. Like, to have a benefit is one thing to have the reliance to the point that you like, you give up other things or sacrifice, you recognize the.


All right, guys, so environmental anchors and I have talked about this or a bit of revision, so all of our minds wander without us realizing on a conscious level and we look to the environment for cues as to what we're doing before consciously realizing it. This isn't just people with ADHD, of course, and so this happens in the background while we're doing a task what am I doing again? And at that moment we don't even know that it's happening and we either get pulled into something else based on like oh, that's what I'm doing, and then kind of jump into that and that might be half an hour later before you consciously realize and then pull yourself back. But you can set up choose in the environment that are associated with doing particular things. Like I was talking about with classical conditioning last time with the Pavlovian dog who salivates at the sound of a gong and using the pomodoro technique with the egg timer so that you've got the auditory ticking anchor or some YouTube thing that has a pomodoro thing that does a similar thing and have the visual marker of the tomato timer on the table and stuff.


So these are the type of visual anchors and I've got that picture there of people digging because it's worth noting that there are plenty of situations where there are naturally visual anchors if you're digging a hole like they are, like they're wearing gloves, they're standing over a hole with other people holding a shovel. When that moment happens, it's like what am I doing again? Very clearly you know what you're doing. Same thing with doing a dishes or something like that, but where you're say using the computer that does a whole bunch of things, many of which are more exciting than the thing that you may want to force yourself to do. And they might have tabs that are open and other programs that are open which indicate at that moment that your brain is checking in. What am I doing again? That you're actually doing something else that pulls you in. So we're limiting that by removing those distractions and maximizing the ones that are associated with what we want it to be other people. So of course they provide an anchor to the task as well. If you're sitting around studying with people and you can see what they're doing, what you're doing, this provides a thematic anchor of like yeah, we're studying this subject as well.


There's a sense of accountability even if it's just to not kind of like sit halfway on the chair and all that kind of stuff, not that I would do that when I'm home, but it kind of keeps you maintaining the filter of normalcy, I guess and that's useful in terms of staying with the task. So lack of loneliness and under stimulation and this is particularly true, as Jonathan was saying, for people who are more extroverted. So just having other people around and I have seen the flip side where some people with ADHD will say like no, I want it to be as quiet as possible because having people around like that's very distracting. Other people actually really thrive on having the sound around them like that. For me, it would really depend on what the sound is. Some people can listen to music, for example, can be a great thing to listen to like a non language based entertaining, fairly like non complex music in the background. But any music will take me completely into it and away from the task pretty much immediately because I like music. But you figure out what works for you and it will differ person to person to some extent.


More reason to rein yourself in that accountability that I was talking about, genuine interest. So because the degree of involuntary focus, focusing on things that are genuinely interesting at that moment is actually no problem for people with ADHD, this is often a very useful point when related to trying differently as opposed to trying harder. So rather than trying to force yourself to do a task using the Pomodoro technique or using whatever techniques that you use, we often use kind of bullying techniques on ourselves to try to force ourselves. They don't work by the way. But any kind of attempt that's unpleasant to get yourself to do it, it's not going to even be the most effective if it is a task that is conducive to getting interested in. If you've ever been interested in it before, you can kind of get the idea that it's interesting even if you're not in it at that moment. Looking at finding ways to grande or pull your focus into it. It's probably the best way to actually end up with a result in terms of your action. But it's interesting to note that that actually wouldn't require too much effort.


You know, it could be fun, it could be a good time. Whereas those other techniques a lot of effort and less result. All righty, so the consensual model, just combining those things high interest, looming disaster, adrenaline and other people these are the kind of three useful things that can be used to make tasks in the moment more conducive for people with ADHD to do in your own time when you want to do it. And if you can get an overlap of two or more of these, the more the merrier. So associated with the looming disaster scheduling, fake deadlines make it a challenge gamify it set time as log progress, high interest starting with fun or talents being having that curious mindset, even watching YouTube videos about it. I got back into these slides, for example, when I needed to kind of get really into it again and write them all by watching Ted Talks. Actually, it was by watching a couple of Ted Talks that I knew I found really interesting in the past that pulled me back into the whole kind of process and other people. So announcing intentions, enlisting a buddy to have accountability, like a buddy when it comes to going for a walk in the morning and stuff like that as well, associated with our goals, accountability partners, even people.


Like if you don't have anyone who lives on your street or lives nearby enough that that's reasonable to do, it can even be useful sometimes to have like an honest accountability partner that you just chat with, you've got like you just regularly chat with about, did you do your thing today? So you're keeping each other on the ball from a distance. And it's that sense of a little bit of community, even if they're not there during the moments that you're exercising or doing whatever it is you have a goal for.


Or the delegation thing.


Okay. Is any way you come across that no. The name or anything like that by chance? I mean, it sounds like something I wouldn't be surprised if they make. It wouldn't be that hard for someone to make.


Yeah, by all means. By the way, if you guys want to be in contact with one another between these sessions, like, if anyone just sends a message to an email to Cast just saying that you'd like to get linked up.


She's done in the past where groups have wanted to. And we leave it up to people that say if they want to, but to everyone who wants to, they can say, yes, put my email on the list and then to send it to everyone. And then anyone who doesn't put their name on the list, they just want to be a part of it. No one has to. So just to keep in mind, if that's something you want to do, as has been done in the past, anybody got any questions about any of those things that I was talking about or anything?


I do, but there's not so much suggestions about ADHD, suggestions about like I would be looking for shared interests, even if it's less talking and more doing things together. Like, if you're not interested, then you're not really connecting. You know, she might think she might not be able to tell that you're not connecting at that moment. But it's not a two way connection. It is possible to find that to, like, just anything that you're both interested in, to focus on that.


How much work has your daughter done at this stage on adapting and kind of figuring out non intuitively some of these social rules and stuff like that?


Yeah. You ever heard of Tony Atwood?


He's written a couple of books that are aimed for teenage girls with Asperger's with high functioning autism. And it would be some useful, what I've done in the past with adults. So this would be on the particularly high functioning side for a teenager. There's a book called Unmasking the Social Engineer and what it goes through. So this is not designed for people with Asperger's or anything like that, but it's a play on words based on Paul Ekman's book. If you've ever seen the show Lie To Me, he's the guy who did all the research on these kind of foundational micro expressions that people don't have control over and they flash on people's faces and can be used to read their underlying intent. So he wrote that book going through all of his kind of understanding the face in a way that most people don't. And then this guy wrote the book as a social engineer with Paul Ekman's help, where he was going into the different aspects of body language. So what people do with their feet, hands, everything like that, in a way that is actually far more advanced than people intuit, but is perfect for somebody with Asperger's whose highest function because it is very precisely stipulated and logically explained.


Yeah, I could have given suggestions directly about that, I guess, but I tend to think, like, what's the overall outcome that you're probably doing that for? And that's probably connecting with her. And I think that that's better achieved by finding something else where you genuinely feel it.


All right, guys, jump into another pomodoro set making boring things better. Reward yourself for completing tasks and withhold rewards if you didn't do it and be honest, it's worth noting it. So this is for stuff that you just have to do that's inherently not going to be interesting. So it doesn't lend itself to kind of that hyperfocused side. You could use the pomodoro technique but it may not even take that long. Like for example, there's a good HowTo ADHD. So HowTo ADHD is a popular YouTube channel that you may have come across like a youngish like late 20s girl who has ADHD who does some really good videos about the different aspects of it. But anyway, so she was talking about her and her partner, who both have ADHD with dishes in their house, given they live together, so they both have a poster with their names on it. And when they do the dishes, they get to move their name further away. And the name that's closest to it determines the person who next has to wash it. And even though, like, you know, you washed it and that means that the next person has to do it next and all that kind of stuff, being able to move, that makes it feel real enough that there's a reward directly after doing the dishes.


And it makes the overall task less aversive and easier to motivate yourself to do over time. And the same with using particular rewards and stuff like that. Stickers healthy treats or other treats in moderation. Race yourself a housemate or a friend, find some ways to gamify it. But I just want to be clear with the things that we choose. Many people, particularly those who really kind of beat themselves up about procrastinating and not getting focused when they want to and stuff like that, will have a self punishment angle where it's like, well, I'm going to stay inside. All day unless I get this done or I'm going to. Basically using things that you need on a regular basis, like socializing and fun and physical activity and stuff like that, as the reward and actually not doing them. And I absolutely don't suggest that there are some things like those that are necessary for our productivity over time and should not be sacrificed. But like say, for example, that you were doing some homework or something like that and you had some friends or you were doing some work, some work from your work and you're doing it from home, whatever it is.


But you've got some friends who want to meet you for lunch at a cafe or something like that. You could decide, alright, so I'm definitely going to do that because I can fit it in as possible. That's a good kind of opportunity to socialize it'll break up my day. Sweet. That's a definite. What can I reward myself with though? That can be like you get a standard latte or you get like, you know, your caramel mocker crazy, whatever it is. It's something that is peripheral and unnecessary but it's a nice little you only get that if you do the thing. It's important not to use something that you essentially need over time as a reward and therefore that you don't get it. Reminders and Planning so planning is a task too and is often overlooked. Decide what must be done. Even like the day before, it can be useful to spend five to ten minutes a day before you want to get some stuff done that's particularly not fun or that you've been avoiding or something like that because it's such a small amount of time and it's not associated with doing the whole task.


Doing the day before can be easier to motivate yourself to do because it's such a small task and once you've done that, the next day you're less likely to get distracted and stuff like that. More likely to get some stuff done because there's a sense of having started it ripped off that bandaid, making sure that you have reminders and everything like that, that you've planned out and made sure that you reasonably have enough time to do everything that you need to do. This is really crucial as well. Starting is its own task as well. So like open the documents, put in the title, maybe paste details and into the form structure, then chill and work on it when you're ready because that is a separate task that doesn't have to be combined with the whole task. So you can just get that one done at a different point and therefore more easily because it's just a small amount of stuff. Bonus tip for writing give yourself permission to write garbage. For anyone who wants to write their best, who has a tendency to have high standards about their writing, it can lead to a lot of procrastination kind of looking at the blank page and thinking well, there's no way to the blank page, in a sense is perfect and it's never going to be perfect after that.


And the first sentence is probably not going to be in your final copy. Your first sentence cannot be as good as you want it to be because to be as good as you want it to be, it has to be surrounded by a bunch of other sentences that incorporate it in which it makes sense and builds toward things together. And the first sentence won't do that. So just like just write. And I've even done this with people who are particularly nervous about like say doing uni assignments and stuff like that, where they've had bad experiences in the past. Like one time, for example, I got someone to write themselves an email which was essentially an essay question that they had. So she was studying social working and had to do an essay on it was something to do with pregnancy and the COVID vaccine or something like that. So I got. Her to send herself an email as though it's from a friend of hers who's pregnant. Just like asking casually the question so that she can see it as like a real task and also a casual one, which doesn't have the whole kind of performance thing attached to it.


So write it like an email and then you realize, okay, it's not going to be in that form later. But these are the ideas that I care about getting on the paper now. I'll do the essay structure and I'll throw those ideas in. So there are different ways to kind of change this sense of what the task is and whether it's real or not. Many of the tasks that we have to do, particularly at university and stuff like that, are by their nature fictitious. They adjust to prove that you can. I mean, it's a useful thing and there's nothing like experience to learn stuff. But it can be hard to motivate yourself to do things when you know that there's no real outcome for it. But seeing an outcome, pretending there's an outcome to any extent you can, can actually help to some degree to pull you into the headspace that you would be if you were answering the question for real. And if you were answering the question for real, you would probably actually not find it difficult and procrastinate because it's not a stressful performance based thing and because it actually is worth doing.


All right, pick your time of day. So it's really worth noting what time of day you're most productive. And it differs for different people. Oftentimes it's in the morning, oftentimes this can be chosen in conjunction with your medication. So I would know, for example, when I take Dextroenthetamine that I eat after half an hour because if I ate before I took it, then it would mess up the absorption. After an hour it kicks in and then I'm not hungry anymore. So that's kind of the perfect timing. And after about an hour and a half to 2 hours, I will have the maximum effect for say, an hour and a half. So if I plan something that time, that would be ideal. But the next thing is the hard thing for us isn't necessarily the most complicated thing and sometimes we assume it is. So, like, if you've got to do I can think of a time when I was having this conversation with a client. So he's a coder and enjoys the innovative coding that he has to do, but he's coming up with it as he goes. But there's a whole bunch of stuff that he's just got to fill in.


Details that are repetitive but can't be copied and pasted. And that's where he would tend to it's. Like, well, that first task that's actually more complicated, right? And a lot of people will intuitively choose to put the more complicated stuff during the time that they're most focused their best. But actually, for people with ADHD, it's often the other way around, where in the late afternoon, where there's probably no chance that you would do admin work and stuff like that. You probably wait till 05:00 come so you can leave. During that time, you might actually be able to inspire yourself to do the interesting stuff, even though it's more complicated and potentially focused. Fine. While during the time that you're best focused, that's actually for those mundanities we were talking about, it's the most difficult things to motivate yourself to do in that moment, which is generally not the most complicated thing. It's generally what's often the simplest, but it's also often the most work for the least overall outcome based utility. Be aware of attentional traps like Facebook and YouTube and everything like that. And I'll watch and I'll put this short video on just because he really, really highlights this idea.


Well, Daniel Schmackenberg is one of my favorite speakers in the world. I'll just put into video mode for anyone who can hear me. Just put something in the thing. If you could see, essentially the picture, but with the comments there in the chat, we're good. Someone can talk. Can you see it yet? Is it on the screen, the video?


That's what I was checking. And I think you'll be able to hear it because I've got an optimized video. I'll just play it now. Guys.


Yeah, that's nuts.


Facebook stays engaged.


What do you recognize? It's so interesting when you point out just how powerful these deep learning recommendation algorithms are. Like, think of how long it takes you if you're somebody who spends a lot of time on Facebook, to hover over 100 things, to hover your mouse over 100 things, and then think of how many times you've done that and the fact that it can be better than people's spouses on average, after just 100 hobbers and clicks. That is absolutely nuts. It's no wonder then that over the last 20 years, everybody's attention on average is going down their attention spans. This isn't just ADHD, this is everyone. And it's no surprise that if you want to get ready for something in the morning but you jump on an attention trap, like a recommendation based one, like TikTok or Facebook or YouTube or Instagram or something like that. It's no surprise that you potentially lose half an hour, because it is one of the most sophisticated pieces of software on this planet that is designed to do its very best against you to take your time away. I use a plugin called Feed eradicator Feed. Eric like, it's a free plugin.


It's on Chrome and Firefox and stuff like that. And I'm sure there are others. Just works well for me, for YouTube and Facebook and some other stuff like that. I don't have any others, but for those ones, it just stops the main feed from coming up. So you can go and check your notifications or whether you have a message or something, but the feed just shows like an inspiring quote instead of the actual thing, so you don't get pulled into that kind of hole. So that can be useful, things like that. But also just like or having some exit time. It was a guy at Google who initially came up with the infinite scroll. Like you scroll down to the bottom, it always creates more. And it's because they've done research on natural stopping points. It's the same reason, by the way, that there are no commercials between two shows when one ends. There used to be like not only commercials between the show, but a commercial at the end of a show. But that was a natural stopping point. That was a point where people decide whether they want to continue. So they got rid of that by removing the ads.


Then. That's what the infinite scroll was about as well. So it's designed to stop you from having a sense of time. It's designed to get you for as long as possible because your time on site is what they sell. Just jump back into PowerPoint.


Yeah, of course.


It's worth noting that it's not just people who have ADHD who are prey to this either. It can be gotten through and sometimes it might be as much as anything the decision to make a compromise like not having the app on your phone so that you've got to use a browser or you can even there's another plugin, I can't remember the name of it, but that I've used in the past. Whatever website you put into it, it bounces from that website to something else and I had it so it bounced to a video of a YouTube video of why it's a bad idea to do that, to remind myself. So it's kind of like if I jumped in there at a moment of forgetting then I'd be like, oh yeah, that's why I had that. But oftentimes it's kind of choosing. But it's worth noting that it's more than just your attention span that is impacted over time by spending a lot of time scanning on social networking oftentimes. Like the major thing that happens in a lot of ways is that you normalize to hyper normal stimuli. So like you think of the amount of novelty you have in the world with the people you see or attractiveness or whatever it is, whatever it is that we're kind of we're looking for out in the world, the amount that we see all at once, all quickly, it's so much greater than the actual thing could be.


You think of like a classic example is there's sex where you have to be, you know, you have to find some book but then there's pornography, right? The novelty, the access and all that kind of stuff. Once you get habituated to that, they will often lose their interest for sex. They lose their interest. That drive for many things. And in the same vein with social networking and stuff, people will often find that. I've had people primarily come to me in what they describe before we realize that the issue is like scrolling their social media too much is that they're like, you know, sometimes I just feel like bored, but like I should be doing something but there's nothing I want to do, nothing's interesting. That's the feeling that people get when they don't allow themselves to actually be bored because they're constantly filling that with something. Like the way that I put it is that the feeling of boredom is like the feeling of hunger where it's not pleasant, but it's also essential. After you haven't eaten for a while, you feel hungry and that'll make you go out and seek some food that you need some nutrients.


But you can get rid of that hunger signal by eating white bread and margarine. And that'll keep you going for a while as you're getting depleted of everything else, but it's not going to keep you going very well. Right? And to me, like just constantly filling every moment we have with something just because we can't stand not having anything, it's just white bread and margarine. It takes away our drive to actually go out and seek something interesting. And when I get people to actually just pull back to the extent that they've got a bit of time where they're just allowing their mind to wonder that they feel more inspired, they feel more creative, they're more likely to spontaneously have ideas that they're interested in pursuing. And there's even research showing that people's creativity improves to the point that they actually even perform better. When it comes to a lateral thinking based task, one example would be like, here's a paper cup. How many things can you think of in two minutes to do with it? So it's like innovatively thinking of ways that you can utilize something. This is the lateral thinking task. People do better at that task when they've allowed themselves to be bored.


They do worse when they're constantly filling up all their stimulus.


There's a really great video by Veritasium on that actually. So Veritasium is just like a pretty big YouTube channel who makes YouTube videos about science. If you type in Veritasium boredom, he's got a great video on going through the science of why we should allow ourselves to get bored and he just puts it really well. If you've never seen any of his videos, he's really a good presenter just.


It's a process addiction, like an addiction process of using that for escapism or self quelling or getting rid of boredom. But it is an addiction. We call it a process addiction when it's not something related to a drug.


It'S the same as going and fixing addiction? I guess so there are several things actually. There's a video on my YouTube channel on addiction specifically, if you're interested really in that, but some things. So when you make things less convenient, the less convenient it is to do the thing that you attempted to do, the less self control it takes to not do it. Let's say I wanted to cut down drinking. And the difference between having to walk like there's a shop within 100 meters of my place that I could buy beer from, but that compared with having a beer sitting here, compared with having a beer in my fridge, compared with having a beer in my cupboard. So I'd have to put in the freezer for a beer to get cold. These are different levels of the degree of convenience that I have. And you want to start with the least convenience, and then as you become more confident and you become better at withstanding that temptation because you're out of the habit, then you can deal with more and more risky situations through situations that more lend themselves to temptation.


Those kind of linear tasks and just to remind everybody. So people here may even have tried the Pomodoro technique in the past and have gotten to the point where they're like, well, this doesn't work for me because, like, you know, I just get into the habit of dismissing them. It is very easy to get into that habit. We're likely all to do it at some stage, to be fair. But the way to pull back from that to getting back into the pattern of, like, it sparing you to actually do stuff is to actually cull down the amount of things that you're using the Pomodoro technique for so that you're building up that sense of, like, you don't ignore the alarm, you straightaway do it. And then you get used to that kind of the feeling of relief, the feeling of productivity, of utility when you actually jump into it and do it. So you're taking away some of the aversion and you're also building up that classical conditioning association with being adrenalized. So that's just a note for people, because it's very easy to have utility from something like a pomodoro technique for a while or reminders or anything like that, but then potentially to get to a point where it's no longer effective and it is possible to draw that back.


But oftentimes it does mean confining the amount of things you're using it for a while. I just wanted to point out, because that's something that often comes up. Did anybody else maybe not get a chance to apply anything from last week? The reason why I'm asking about this is not to like, single people out. Belinda will come to you in a SEC because it looks like you're ready, but it's just all about kind of noting that it doesn't always happen, as in, like, even if we're completely playing goals and wholeheartedly want to do them, there are other things that can get in the way. And it's worth kind of realistically reviewing that, which we do over the next couple of weeks regarding our goals as well. But it's just that kind of aspect of fairness and noticing what we did do or what we didn't do, or even not getting caught into the notion of, like, thinking that you failed at something that realistically wasn't the intention anyway. If you haven't, like, set the reminders or set up a task and stuff like that, and that's fine because this course is about picking the eyes over.


Right. I just want to note that sometimes that happens and it's very easy to see it as failure. So blender.


It'S hard to change.


What's the difference between the piles that makes one more interesting than the others?


Is one like, newer or more novel, or it's a smaller pile, probably more varied. More varied.


So what roughly, if you're willing to say you don't have to, is there piles that you're going through crikey just as a rough kind of, like, overall.


And so what are the tasks that or if you were to pick one and this will be something that we talk about a lot next week regarding the actual goal setting, it might be something that you set a goal about, but it's about like, picking that one thing in your life that if you do that, everything else gets easier. And I find that there tends to be that one thing for us pretty well. Any time. I don't think I could think of a time for myself for which that wasn't true. Like, okay, that's the thing that if I got that done and that can be cleaning up sometimes, or it can be doing some sort of admin that you've been putting off or whatever it is, but it's like it's usually the thing you most don't want to do. What would that thing out of those piles be?


Sorry, I got to go through.


Just the last 5 seconds.


I'm not sure just the last 5 seconds?


Yeah, that sounds like it's the kind of thing that would fit into it. Is it in the garage that you have those piles that you wanted to.


No, but the three piles that you were tortured.


Okay. So it sounds like, I imagine that if you were to do that to sort out the clutter in the garage to an extent that you feel is reasonably enough that sorting out those piles would get way easier because you would feel so much lighter.


Part of it would be that. But what you're saying about that sense of like really feeling in some way that you're unable to do it, it's an interesting point to kind of get through because when we think about it, it's like, well, of course I'm physically capable of doing it. I understand that intellectually, but just how strong the feeling can be, that something that you haven't engaged with for a long time and maybe you wanted to engage with it or you wanted to get it done for a long time. So then there's been perhaps many moments that you've tried to rev yourself up and potentially not being able to. Or some people kind of wait for themselves to get revved up hoping that that's going to happen spontaneously, but it often doesn't. But it's very much about that sense of capability, and I've noticed that myself. Like, when, say, I've had, like, a stack of GP letters to do, I've gotten through a bunch of them. I'm like, well, I know I've done a whole bunch of GP letters. It's not like it's that hard a task in a sense that I don't think I'm going to be able to do it.


But when I'm getting those things done, finally, after ages, there is a real sense of, like, shit, I can really do this. Which is interesting to note, because that shows that there was some doubt. And that's the thing that's often useful to address. Often when I'm working with people with ADHD, it's about like, how can we find those small wins over time that you can do something consistently no matter what? That is something. So there isn't that sense that when it comes to consistency, it won't be possible.


Did anybody else want to give their to give their last week before we move on? Caitlin, is the noise coming from you? Caitlin I think of faith. I think it's from your background. So when you are mute, there's like a grinding. I could be wrong, but when I muted your space, it went away. So I figured there must be noise. But anyway, Caitlin okay, so I didn't.


My problem is, can I ask Caitlin what's the task that you have in mind so maybe we can back up that task and see whether it relates well to that technique.


And when you say people, you mean like university?


Is going to be relevant to that for sure.


Oftentimes it's about finding the right strategy as well, because it is a linear task like that. The Pomodoro technique could work well. What I found for myself, like, if I really want to make sure that I clean, I invite somebody over who I would be embarrassed if they saw it in the state that it was in. And then I know that I'll do it because it's that accountability. So it's like, it's inspiring that non negotiable deadline because they don't know it's super messy, but they're coming over in three days. Well, I'd better get it clean. Like, in that case, that's a situation where a lot of people with ADHD are unlikely to not do it because there's that pressure and there's that absolute timing of when you've got to do it by and stuff like that. And music is always great with clean, by the way.


Yes. So in that situation, if there's enough of an absolute deadline at that moment, probably don't even need to use a Pomodori technique to be able to crack into it about that.


Do you find it easier to work from home?


Yeah, it's one of those things you're like, this is a fantastic idea when you first start doing it. I can do all of these projects and you're like, well, actually, while I can do all of that, I also can lay in bed and watch Netflix.


Yeah, having that shorter time frame is often like it applies to a few things that people can get an advantage out of. Oftentimes when people are struggling, they find themselves going to things and they're late because they were like, maybe set the alarm for like 2 hours before they got to leave the house. And that means that they don't have to get up at that second, but then there's not an alarm or a minder for the second they do have to get up. And I've done this myself as a psychologist, usually you'll either kind of start really early so that you catch people before work, as well as a bit in the middle of the day or late. Right. So you're kind of catching either. So if I start late, that might be like 11:00 and finish at seven. And that means, like, I'm up way earlier than that. And then I'm like, if I've got, say, 3 hours between the time that my alarm goes off and the time that I've got to be ready, then I'm much more likely in that case to actually convince myself that two minutes is enough time. Right.


But if I think ahead of time, I know that I need 30 minutes to get ready and then I make sure that I've got an alarm only 30 minutes. Even if I have one earlier, I've got that point where it'll remind me, take me out of what I'm doing. And I'll see that be like, okay, shit, I really have to get up now. Okay, good. That's often a really useful thing for people. Also, one other thing I just wanted to say, based on what you're saying, James, is it sounds like time management. Well, time management, but it sounds like with work you've got things that you do that are more like that are more mundane and things that you do that are more interesting. Now, I wonder whether it might be useful to kind of like break up and figure out to you what the most difficult things are to make yourself focus on because it's so easy to get caught up into, like thinking, well, the most complicated things that might be the most difficult for somebody without a headache. These must be the most difficult. So I'll plan those for the times that I'm like most, focused on most in the game.


But oftentimes what I find is that these are the things that we can plan actually for times maybe towards the end of the day or something like that, where you're less onto it and you'll still actually do a good job with those complex tasks. But if you leave the mundane things till that time, which we would often do to try to give ourselves the ideal primary time to do the complex stuff, then we often just don't do those other tasks. So it can work to kind of mix that around and be like, what are the tasks I most struggle to actually get into and when should I place those? So I'm going to do them anyway.


Alright, you guys better crack into this week. So maybe we'll just get one or two people rocks in. Yup.


When you say Pomodoro on the phone, do you mean like an app or a YouTube video?


Okay, I've seen it, so there's probably an app I haven't actually found.


Yeah. But there's definitely like YouTube videos you could bring up on your phone or.


No, I think it would be, actually. I found a very potentially interesting bit of technology for somebody with ADHD over the last couple of days, which I've actually ordered. So it's like one of those smart watches that will track your timing, the things that you do and tell you to get up and do stuff and whatnot, but this one actually electrocutes. You tell that to somebody without ADHD and they're like, you're a bloody nut case. Right, but when I saw that, I was like, yes, I've been after that, I didn't think it was legal to have something like that, but I want it to be painful because even if, say, let's say that you want to go to the gym and you. Decide to decline it at that time. If you get like a Zap, then at least you've got a version either way to potentially balance it. And I'm really interested to see how it goes. So I have ordered the latest one is like $200 delivered. So I guess you'd want to make sure it's good. You can get one for about half that price, but we'll see how it goes. It's called Pavlock, P-A-V-L-O-K if anyone's interested.


But either way, once it comes in the mail, I'll tell you guys what it's like. I'm actually really excited about it because I've had those fitbits that are like vibrate right, and tell you that it's time to get up and move. But how easy is that to ignore? I need something to hit me there. So when have you taken on too much? Does somebody want to give an impression of what that might look like or what it's look like for them? Yeah.


Yeah. And we do it. I mean, certainly a lot of us do it all the time. And I'll go through some of the reasons now formatory time of why we often do that. First, I'll just go over this section and I think that this is a bit of revision. The fact that lower tension rest is important because attention is a limited resource. Like, I was talking about this area of the brain, the dorsalito prefrontal cortex. It takes a lot of resources to run that. And when we are resource depleted or we're not getting enough resource or we're not getting a lot of resources to our brain, that's going to be one of the first areas that then don't get as much. So it completely makes sense that when you've got something, whether the model for self control, the model for using that part of the brain is the strength model. And it is because they're both high resource intensive areas that are only going to be built up if we're actually using them to the extent that we're barely being able to make it work based on what we have. So we have to be like delaying gratification or deciding to do things that we don't want to do and stuff like that.


Every time we administer that will over ourself. Basically, the difference between what we would like to have done and what we would like to do. The gap between those two things is selfcontrol. It's also useful to point out that so using a technique like getting yourself fascinated with something and therefore kind of hyper focusing on it, that tends not to take as much like mental effort and stuff like that in a sense per time that you're doing it, you're doing it for 12 hours. That's going to take a bit of mental effort, but it doesn't take as much mental effort in a sense to do those things because where was I? Sorry, I lost my train of thought there. To do those things. I forgot what those things were.


So to do tasks that require a lot of self control yes. Placing your attention on things that you don't really want to place your attention on, that if we're doing that and we know we've got to do that to do whatever task at hand, then it's also important to make sure we have low attention rests in between. Like, say, going for a walk, just letting our thoughts wander, maybe even going outside and just kind of seeing in a place where you enjoy the atmosphere. Because you imagine, like, if you're doing something physical day, like building a fence and then you go to the gym in your lunch break, that wouldn't be a very good idea in terms of being as efficient as you can to do that physical tasks. And that's often what we do, where we jump between trying to focus on something mundane or whatever it is, some admin task and then potentially jump to maybe video games or something like that, where there is actually a high degree of attention that you're paying, and that may not be a very good rest. So that you can actually come back effectively and efficiently and do the thing at hand.


And also just noting that we don't relax and rest very well when we kind of like force ourselves to stay in a room like that, where it's like a self punishment thing, I must do something where I won't leave. It's a good idea, if you're not being productive, to get up every half an hour and go for a bit of a walk at the blood flow and things like that. We're stepping away from that kind of self punishment aspect. So deciding what to and what not to take on, all the most important things you already have to do, you consider what those are at any moment. And it can be a very good idea to actually do this practice where you think of a week coming up, say, for work. That might be something you do, like on a Sunday or something like that, whatever day kind of fits to then look at the next seven days and to think, what are the tasks that I've got to do over that time? Whether it be work, university life, admin, everything like that. And you get a sense for how busy you are in terms of how much your time is actually taken up.


Noting that you've got to spend some of that time actually having a bit of fun and doing things like balancing out that lifestyle. It's really important to do because once you do, if you get asked then to do something for someone or maybe even to meet some friends or something like that, something that's either more exciting than the thing that you've got to do. So it's really tempting to try to justify it. Or there's a sense of like, somebody needs your help, you want to help them. It's novel, it's more interesting. There are all these factors that can make that a more appealing thing. So we want to increase the certainty that it's a bad idea if it is a bad idea. And if you know that your week is pretty much full and adding another thing is going to mean that either you're going to be flustered beyond your resources or you're going to have to let something slide, then it becomes a lot easier to say no right in that moment. It's when we can't justify that to ourselves. So it's like, why wouldn't I say no? And often that's exactly what our brain is going to like default to if we want to change from the thing that we're doing and the more that we want to change from, the more aversive it is, the more we're going to be like, the more our brain is going to convince us to do something else.


It's an interesting point in general that the prefrontal cortex like this kind of the part of our brain that is the most different from people versus other animals that we're aware of, where we have a very big prefrontal cortex. The other areas of brain are generally accounted for in other animals as well. This kind of like logical, the language based, the inhibition of things you don't want to do. This area, it is secondary to the limbic system, the emotional drive that we have. And it serves the limbic system. So the limbic system is the boss, right? Our feelings, what we desire, like what we crave, all that kind of stuff like that ID monster if you think about it. In that sense, that's the part of our brain that's in charge. And that's not just people with ADHD, that's everybody. We don't tend to kind of realize that most of what the prefrontal cortex actually does is just erroneous things in service of the limbic system. Like, for example, the amount of time that we spend trying to the amount of effort that is dedicated in general to trying to procreate, we'll say, or not even actually procreate.


But the act is one good sign as like, why does that why would that make sense that they would be focusing so much on this thing that actually isn't really of appropriation and that would be evolutionarily adaptive? Well, it wouldn't be except that that's what the limbic system wants and then that's what's being served. So it's like the prefrontal cortex is just trying to figure out how to give, to give what the limbic system wants as much as possible. And that relates to this to like when you're tempted to do stuff because the prefrontal cortex convinces us that we can do the things that we want to do, right? Like you come across some money on the ground or something, you know, like some morally ambiguous situation. The prefrontal cortex is going to generally jump in and do its job to some degree, of convincing us, to the extent that we want to pick up that money and not to hand it in or whatever, we'll do its job as much as we can to try to convince us that that's an acceptable idea. Alex that makes sense.


Okay.


I know what you mean. I've blocked that, that's fine. So yeah, so time blindness, the lack of a sense of how long things are going to take. But I want to make the distinction between trance or the experience of time in the moment versus our ability to potentially learn how long things take retrospectively or looking forward. So people with the awareness of time, the awareness of the flow of time and how long things take, very much is determined by checking in and having that sense of like, well, I've checked in at this time. There's some sense that roughly a certain amount of time has passed and then I check in again, that kind of thing. So that requires having some degree of your attention left over to do that kind of checking in. When people with ADHD are really intently hyper focusing, they're not going to do as much of that kind of checking in because they're going to be fully immersed and at that time they experience what we call trance, where we feel like something takes less time than it did. So that's the experience in the moment and that's part of what leads to this sense of time blindness.


But another big part of it is also like that it's the lack of planning. And it's worth noting that this kind of sense of how long is a certain task going to take? This is not beyond people with ADHD. It just means being intentional about it. Right. Because there is that time blindness just looking back in your memory and being like, how long did that task feel like it took? That's likely to be inaccurate, but if you actually note, alright, so I think X task is going to take me so long, like you estimate what it is going to take you 2 hours and then, you know, I saw it this time, then it took me this long. And we repetitively get that information even if we're not like deliberately noting it down in a way that we can come back to that experience over time will calibrate our sense of how long things are going to take. But it does mean intentionally kind of doing that. But noteworthy, it's not something that like by doing these things that you've got to do in order to take advantage of it anyway, you would be enacting that process that would improve your ability to determine how long things will take.


Yes, it's just not like we tend not to have that experience necessarily without deliberately starting that habit in the first place. And that's why people may not have done it intuitively without kind of like putting that into place. By the way, probably, I don't know, somewhere around 50% of the people who I talk to about this point of like, you know, like setting up, looking ahead, figuring out roughly how long things are going to take and stuff like that. People will say exactly what you did, Jonathan, but it's like, well, I don't know how long things take and stuff like that. And I have worked with several people to actually build up that sense over time, where even if I'm seeing them individually, then we can come up with, all right, so try this out. We're going to check in on it. We come up with an estimate for how long? I write that down, and then we note I get them to actually, like, they've got a reminder for the time that they start, and I get them to note down the time that they end, and then we compare it. And once you've done that intentionally a couple of times, you often start kind of doing it in the background because it becomes like, oh, it's this useful thing and then your brain's like, what?


I'm going to map that in the background so that I can get a sense of it. Like any of these things. It's like it's the hardest right at the start because it's a new thing and then it gets easier and easier.


So just jumping back to the details, get an idea for your week of things that you've got to do and your day. Schedule this planning time and treat it like a task of itself. Like we're talking about, like I talked about a bit last time of like planning is itself a task. Ideally, we want to separate it from the overall task. And this is part of that kind of breaking things up into smaller pieces like somebody mentioned earlier. And it's about like instead of having that part where we're most likely to get distracted or flounder the setting up part as a part of the whole big task, we can have that as a really kind of small thing that can be done with adrenaline and quickly the day before or something like that. So then it becomes a much smaller task. And when you sit down to do the overall thing that parts are already set up and we're less likely to flounder or get distracted. Rake the importance of what you have to do and note that urgency is not the same as importance. And it can feel like that sometimes. So urgency, the sense that no matter how important something is, and that could be pretty flimsily important, like looking at a notification on your phone, but there's a sense of urgency because it popped up at that moment.


You don't know if it's important. And it's very easy to conflate the two where we kind of get caught into like, oh, this is urgent, I've got to do this this second. And then conflate that with importance and jump into that potentially over something that is more important. But ultimately the way that I kind of look at importance is like, consider yourself at the end of the day or end of the week, looking back, what would you feel best about having done? And the answer to that will be the things that are most important to you. So then if you kind of ask yourself that question about these things that might seem urgent, how good will I feel about getting that done? Versus other things that should give us an idea about how important something is to us versus how versus the urgency. Because the urgency doesn't matter a damn. If it's not that important, it can seem like it. So is the new thing the most important thing? And if not, do it after the most important things. Does the new thing stop you from doing important things? If so, don't take it on.


Easier said than done, effectively limiting what you take on. Because it's in that moment that you've got to spot it and you don't necessarily know when you're going to have your time or resources requested of you. So sometimes you might be able to control, like when that time comes where you've got a request for your time, like you could check in to see whether somebody needs something, noting that, okay, you're going to apply this technique. So then that's a way to apply it without having to train it to the point that you're going to naturally apply it in the moment and then to start to build up that strategy, if that makes sense. Because the more that you can do it in any way, the more that you've practiced it, that it becomes a normal thing that you do to think ahead in this way and to determine the importance of a urgency and stuff, the more that you're likely to do it when the situation presents. And it's only after practicing it a bit and getting used to that sense and seeing firsthand that it's actually useful and a good idea. It's only after that that you're likely to apply in those moments where there's an unpredictable request for your time or resources, which is often what it is.


Consider your current load, like I was talking about, and then consider the importance of new things versus the other things like I was talking about as well. So let's just chill and does anybody have any questions about any of those things? Rather explain it really well or really badly really well because you all just perfectly get it and don't have any questions.


Not what I wanted 100%. There's a good HowTo ADHD video. So that YouTube channel, how to ADHD, there's a good video.


Yes, it's really good. She does one on this like this idea of like importance versus urgency. And she has this like quadrant where it's like importance, urgency, importance, urgency. So is it like the intersection of those and determining does something feel important and can't remember exactly what it was. But if you typed in how to ADHD and saw her video, that might be a good way to re explore it. And I know that she has a worksheet that she's got in her description that is used in that video for people who like, worksheets. As you guys could probably tell, I don't tend to work use worksheets a lot because I've lost enough worksheets for enough lifetimes to figure that when I get given worksheets, I'm like, what am I going to do with this after the time that I get it? So I tend to lean away from that. So for people who like it, that's an opportunity to get one. Was someone going to say something?


I know what you mean there. You must have seen the video, I'm guessing, that I was referring to of how to ADHD because those quadrants are it's like high importance, low urgency, high urgency, low importance, et cetera. And that quadrant that you're talking about where it's like high urgency, but sorry, high importance, but low urgency is often the part that's really hard for people with ADHD to address because there's no absolute deadline. We have to think ahead and define a time for that in order to prioritize it. And that includes things like our tax, because there's no absolute point where we have to do it generally unless we really wait a long time or different things like that. But it's like get to it when you get to it. But it is if you think about it like really crucial to you that you've done it versus not done it. And I think that this strategy of thinking ahead for a week and figuring out is there anything and maybe even particularly thinking about is there anything that's important that doesn't have a particular time that I would fit it into? Then they would be the ones to fit in first potentially to make sure that you have time for them and then once you've done that a few times and even just like having done it once, it's one of those things that it makes you more of aware of it even when you don't specifically do it.


Like in the past there was like a week or two that I counted calories just because I was curious about like developing my intuition for how many calories is something mainly out of curiosity, frankly. But the point is that I didn't have to count calories forever. Just doing that for one or two weeks was enough that I have a sense of it now and that's something that I can apply when I look at food, not that it necessarily stops me, but it is something that can apply in this situation. You do that looking ahead for the week and it becomes something you do intuitively without actually deliberately doing it. To some extent going into the future is my general experience and what I've seen for other people as well. So at least that means not effort forever in order to make this and retain it as a strategy. Pomodoro so saying no so reasons it's hard to say no in general, so we might be asked to do something that's more interesting than what we're doing, right? Like, if you're say you've got a few things that you've got to study for university, you've got to do for work or whatever, but it's like the weekend you want to get out, you've been asked to go and hang out with some friends for lunch.


That's something that if you can fit in that socializing, it's a good idea to fit that in. But sometimes we can't and sometimes that's going to be appealing enough that we'll start being like, oh, there's another day that I'll probably do this, I'll probably do it tomorrow. Not that I'll be hungover because I go out with friends and DA DA DA DA DA and then tomorrow there's no way I'm going to do it. But these kind of justifications that we come up in the moment to do that thing, we want to do that frankly, if we really looked at outside of the context of actually wanting to justify it, I'm not going to get that done if I don't do it today. Like that kind of thing. We want to be liked, of course, and we want to be helpful and why we must learn people pleasing. As I'll talk about, we've talked about briefly already and we'll talk about more in week nine in particular. But people pleasing is this kind of it's not just doing things for other people. It's a good thing to be generous and to care for people and to do things for people.


There's no problem with that. It becomes people pleasing in this sense when we do things for people outside of the resources that we have. And it is in the sense, it's often driven by the fear that if we don't do things for people, then they're going to leave. That that's the reason for which they value us. It is actually a compensation, right? Like, if we find out at any stage or we decide or determine at any stage when we're younger still here that we're likely to be rejected or it's inevitable, or we're likely to fail at things and that will lead to some sort of rejection or something like that, then we may develop other compensatory techniques, doing things for people. Class clown, unrelenting standards. These are all examples of those. And the people pleasing can be a really tough one because it means if the concern for the person who's doing that is like, what if they actually don't, you know, they don't want to be friends with me after I stopped doing these things, then that means taking that risk. But it's worth noting that without taking that risk, that you don't get the opportunity to see that it's not required.


If I always do that thing, which I feel is the only reason why people like me, and I always do it, so I never get to see whether it's okay, whether they hang around anyway when I don't do that thing. So then I don't actually get any evidence over time to prove that it was no longer necessary or never necessary. So it means kind of building up that courage, finding the places that you can do it in some way, and building that up so that you can build up that evidence to yourself that it's not required. So there's courage and there's risk and everything like that in there. This can be very challenging, potentially, but that's another driver to potentially say yes to things that you might not have the resource or the time or ability to do at that stage. Saying no is a skill, and it does take practice. Spotting when, as I was talking about on the last slide, and also doing it well, which is this next slide of the art of saying no. So instead of using the word no, say exactly what or when was like, what you can do or when you can help, that kind of thing.


So it's like if you imagine it as like, no is like a wall, right? So, like, somebody wants to go forward, they're like, can we do this thing? Can we go forward? It's like no block. And then they're like, they hit that wall, and they're like, all they want to do is find. A way around that because they're being stifled, right? But if instead all you're saying is something like, look, I can do that, but look, I've got to do this first. It will take me this long. Let me know if you still need help in 20 minutes or I'll come up and ask once I've done that. So you're giving them a chance to figure it out on their own, which, I mean, we know if it's like a workplace situation where somebody's asking for help, that usually people figure it out on their own. If they're given the time, they will often ask the question of somebody more senior or who they expect to know the answer because it's easier than, you know, going looking up and stuff like that. Now, there is like, I can help you for half an hour, but I do have to go at that time.


And then you could actually set the alarm in front of them so they see you doing it, so that it's like, okay, right, I know he's got that alarm. It's not going to be a surprise when your alarm goes off in half an hour because you've said, yes, that's the time I've got. They've seen you set the alarm. So when that goes off, it's like, okay, I do have to pop over. Generally speaking, that'll be a fine time to leave if it was, like, out of the blue and it wasn't actually preempted and it was just like you're helping and then your alarm goes off and you pop off. It could be taken well, but it's less likely to be taken well than when they have that full kind of pre understanding of what's going to happen. Look, I have to do this, the thing at hand and I'm feeling pretty swamped, but such and such over there might be able to help you. And that's pretty much like a straight no in a sense, right? But it's still that sense of like, there isn't a wall of like, you must stop. It's like, okay, so I can't but it's like but you might be able to go there.


It's like if you think of martial arts or something like that, it's the equivalent to Pichi countering versus direct block. And it does tend to actually make a pretty significant difference in the way that people take things in the amount that they're likely to be like, oh, come on, you can do it, mate. Come on. Whatever it is, depending on the situation of how they would try to kind of twist your arm to do the thing, much less likely to happen if it's done in one of these ways. Now, note that people respond better when given a direction instead of war, just generally. And note two, that if people are not used to having boundaries from you, it may take some time to adjust. So if you've had a pattern in the past of acquiescing and doing things for people beyond your resources. So you're like people are used to you always saying yes, even if it's not the best thing for you. Then they may they're kind of trained to expect whatever we do. Right. So then the next time they would be like their expectation would be that you'll probably do it because you have in the past.


And if you have decided that you're going to redefine the notion of what people pleasing means in your life and you don't want to do that anymore, then that might mean ruffling some feathers in the meantime. Right. Like it has been the case sometimes where like through helping people, through people pleasing or low perception of themselves, low self esteem and stuff like that, but sometimes it will mean then like if people have been taking advantage of them but then they're a bit stifled and it's not like everybody is going to remain around. It is possible that through doing those things for people that we invite people into our lives that primarily want things from us. Right. And those people are not likely to be consistent friends, but the people in general who are closest to us, who we care about, who we know there's some relationship beyond just trading, doing things for one another or whatever it is, they don't go. Those friends are still there and they become the proof that you don't need to do the people pleasing. So do you take things on that you shouldn't? What are the pressures you most often give in to or let's have a longer chat today and workshops and situations we have that reoccur for us.


Should we decline? First of all, just does anybody have any questions about any of those or anything that you want me to go over again or anything that I haven't gone over that's related to this?


Okay, that's okay.


Say that we have problems in boundaries in general. In some ways, yes. I guess that can apply to lots of different things. But certainly when it comes to the experiences that people have who have ADHD, which we went over a bit in that first session, are likely then to lead to some of these traumas that can be handled in various ways, including potentially people pleasing or underlenting standards. I talked about the one where because people with ADHD will be able to focus well on days that the content is genuinely interesting early in school and not so well when it's not. So there will be fluctuations day to day. So then the level that you're expected to be your abilities here and then it's not always happening and sometimes you're not heading in your work and stuff like that, that can often lead to being called lazy or saying that you've got a potential that's unmet and stuff like that. And through that experience, because you know underneath it all that you are trying and then you're trying and being told that you're coming up short, that's the experience of failure over time. And that can lead because it's overtime and potentially feels unpredictable, that it can give you the sense that you're walking on eggshells, that it could happen at any time, so it's inevitable.


And once you think that was like, how do I make up for this thing? If I think that there's this thing that's about me that people tend to look down on me for or whatever it is, I better do something to make up for that. And so that's one thing that's very common. Another is because the prefrontal cortex for people with ADHD, although it catches up in almost every aspect, by the time people with ADHD are adults, there is a delay in the development of the prefrontal cortex that can be really present around like mid to late primary school and potentially lead to bullying. Because there's a one to two year difference in the ability to understand social nuance. So that can lead to some bullying as well. That can lead to the sense of rejection, which then could be then taken care of by a person in a similar way of unrelenting standards of people pleading. So for reasons like that, because experiences like that are more common. The things that people do to try to shore themselves up, regardless of those, are more common for people with ADHD.


Oh, yeah. So when people talk about perfectionism, I refer to that idea as unrelenting standards, just because perfectionism may not perfectly frame it for some people. You take me back a decade and I definitely had unrelenting standards, but I was also definitely not a perfectionist because although I didn't have a diagnosis of ADHD, I knew that my strength wasn't doing things perfectly in that way. So there was no little mistake. Instead, the idea was I need to excel in some way so that I'm like defining myself as good and that'll be the thing that people might value me for or whatever it is. These aren't like conscious on the face kind of thoughts, but they're kind of underneath it all. Does that help? Does that make sense?


Is there something else I can add? Or maybe does someone I would like.


Fair enough. I'm pretty damn certain that the answers to the questions that I gave there were probably important to the majority of the people here, to be fair. So that's all right. We'll have other times anyway, so we've actually got 20 minutes. We could end a bit early, and I just go over this last slide, but we can also have a chat or anything like that before next session. For anybody who would like to leave at this stage, it's just to come up with anything that you may like to change your life. Noting that next week will be about goal setting and it's all about picking. I mean, sure, you could pick better exercise consistency from wait times or feeling calmer at work, or getting on top of your Admin commitments, but I'll go through a fair bit of detail next time on why it's important to pick. That one thing like I was talking about earlier, that makes everything else easier after you've done it. That one thing that's probably the last thing that you want to make yourself do because it'll seem like the most diverse, or maybe it's been sitting there for a long time feeling like it's weighing you down.


That's the thing that I'd like to focus on, is the goal, if that exists for people in their lives right now. Anybody have any questions?


Two, you can ask me if you like. Sorry. So.


Through yeah, I did talk about that a bit in the first week, so you'll get more detail there. But I will still answer the question now. So were you diagnosed with ADHD predominantly inattentive? Yes, I just jumped to that because most people I find who are diagnosed as adults tend to have the inattentive presentation, not all, but it's just that I find it's more likely to be missed earlier on when people have the inattentive presentation. Also when they're high functioning enough to not have grades that lead to seeing that something's arrived as well. But yes, related to the different types of ADHD, the mixed presentation of ADHD, including inattentive components and hyperactive, it is the more common, but it's still a considerable amount of people, about 30%, who have predominantly inattentive or hyperactive types. And basically I talked about in that first week why it makes conceptual sense for them to be called the same thing. So when you look at the traits that exist for people with the hyperactive presentation or mixed presentation of ADHD, and these might be like being more active tapping more, seeking novelty, potentially doing things fast to the point of making mistake and stuff like that.


So one, some of those things actually will happen for people who have the inattentive presentation anyway. If you're doing something that's really mundane or there's a sense that it's not that valuable or worth your time and stuff like that, but you have to do it, there's a sense that you might rush it, inattentable not and then that'll lead to the higher rate of making mistakes. In the same vein, some of the characteristics that relate to the hyperactivity components, they're essentially acted out components of what happens for people with just the inattentive component. So like, because they're required for external stimulation to focus on one thing to the exclusion of all else is greater. For people with ADHD, when they're focusing on a conversation where somebody's, like speaking slowly or with a monotone kind of voice and stuff like that, then they're likely to have, say, another song in their head or something like that, because they're trying to fulfill that requirement for external stimulation. The person with a hyperactive presentation may like tap and stuff like that, a bit more than somebody with the unit tentative presentation, but they're dealing with the same thing, right?


They're dealing with this sense that I was like, I want to focus on this conversation, but that's only enough to take up 30% of my full focus. So I've got other stuff going on in my head at the same time. They could potentially act it out a bit more, but it's still that same kind of sense of needing extra stimulation to be able to focus on one thing to the exclusion of all else. And there are other things like that. So going back, viewing that part of the first week would give you a more detailed analysis of that by memory.


You had a second question?


Yeah.


Honestly?


Yeah. Sometimes I'll get people coming individually have ADHD, and one of the issues that they'll tell me about is they think that their memories are like they get told that they forget little details and stuff like that, and they're really concerned that maybe their memory is not so great. And so far, at least every time that that's happened when I've asked about it, it's been situations where they weren't actually paying attention at the time, so they didn't encode the information. Now that's a different situation to the one that you're presenting, where it's like in the moment, your working memory that kind of like holding it in the moment. This is related to having some focus still on it. So it's relevant if all of our focus, even for a split second, goes entirely to something else, that's gone. But that doesn't mean that we've forgotten all about it in the sense that our longterm memory has lost it. It means that it's lost relevance for a second to us at that moment. So, like, that's why getting Adrenalized and stuff like that can help for those kind of tasks potentially. But I also want to note, so, like, you're talking about applying for jobs, and that's a really difficult thing to keep on doing sometimes because you apply for a job, you may not even, like, hear back at all.


And if you do, you might like you don't know how far you've actually gotten. It's a difficult situation to stay motivated in. And the more averse of something is, or the less faith that we have that our efforts are actually going to be useful, the less we're going to be able to focus on those things. So there are different aspects that might lead to the procrastination at that stage, which can be felt as that sense of, like, drifting and potentially losing track of what you're thinking about. But there will be other factors probably related, and that's why it's useful to kind of get into the situation, because maybe, like, that could be a really good potential goal to go over next time. Because what we will do next time is actually spend the time with every person to go over their goal and workshop it, not only to make sure down the track in the session that it meets all the criteria of, like, it's possible, it's feasible, it's achievable, that kind of thing. But you're addressing the main blocks in there that have stopped you from doing it so far. So it can be complicated.


I hope that I'll be able to spend the time with you next time to go over that if that's the goal that you have. But I just figure does that make sense? Just that the procrastination reason can come from many different sources. And I imagine particularly with job like applying for jobs, that most of the time, at least part of what causes like what makes that difficult for people is that sense of like it's just like this constant kind of feeling of rejection and you don't know whether it's going to be useful. And something that's really important for people with ADHD in general to be able to focus on stuff is the belief that it's actually worth it, you know, that the juice is worth the squeeze. And if you're not really sure if you're like, you know, you don't have faith that you're going to get that job even if you put in all this effort, it's going to take a long time. That's a situation that can be quite difficult to focus in. So building up that sense of hope might even be the first kind of step, potentially.


Now we can work on that at next time. Does anybody else have anything that they wanted to ask about, to talk about or even just floate to the group?


And it sounds like you're going through that adjustment period from like yeah, you've had that pattern. They're used to you saying yes to everything and now you're raining in a bit and they're just like, wait, you didn't say yes. And then we get used to that over time, especially the people who are close to you and stuff. Have you been able to talk to anyone who like in that boat about why you're doing it and that kind of thing?


I didn't.


Yeah. And it's just that adjustment. Right. But it sounds like you're doing the hard yards already in the way, in the things that we're talking about in terms of, like, all right, I've got to rain this in. That's going to mean ruffling some feathers, but I'm going to do it, and then kind of weather that storm. It's worth noting as well that there's still going to be a balance. It's not all negative reasons for which we decide to take on extra things and stuff like that. Sometimes it's worth noting, like, what are the various reasons? Which ones do I care about, which ones don't? I can think of a client who I'm working with who has ADHD, and she like she's always been, like, the social hub for a friend's kind of thing. Like, even she has three kids and a husband now and stuff like that, but she still, like, always is the person who organizes stuff for her friends and stuff like that. And, I mean, we've identified that part of it, is that kind of like, this is her role, her value in the group. That was part of it, what we've been talking about today.


But there's still that positive side of, like, well, I really like, when I've got that momentum and stuff, I don't want it to completely phase out. So it's a matter of looking at when is it a good time? How much is it a good time? So for her, given them working with her individually so there's more time. We're going through overall values that she has for how she wants to live her life and what she cares about and then kind of figuring out how much time she's got and then figuring out what are the things? That are really meaningful and important to keep on doing and which ones are less important so that she's not throwing the baby out with a bath water as well. So I just wanted to kind of point out as well, because sometimes that'll apply, too.


Yeah. All right, guys. Well, that pretty much takes us to the time anyway. So I shall see you all next week for some goal setting. And thanks very much for coming this week.


Watch that it's a shock. You know, it's one of those, like I imagine it's similar to one of those, like, trick lighters where you're like.


That's a really good idea. I have had some people who have told me they've used that they just got really good at doing it half asleep, but for most of them, that would probably be really helpful.


I'm like, yeah, because the sense is like anything that makes you kick in and use your brain effectively as though you're fully awake will fully wake you up. Same thing with your body. If you, like, physically move your body, as are you fully awake, with coordination and everything, that will very quickly wake us up. And sometimes I've even got people, like if they really struggle to get themselves out of bed, particularly in cold mornings, to do some like 20 seconds of hyperventilating, like really hyperventilating. You won't want to go back to sleep after that, I promise you. So there are different things like that. The shock watch that I've looked at, it's got one that's actually specifically just for getting up in the morning, which is a pretty rough way to wake up. But I guess the idea is you start to wake up before it. And also it has regimes like the ones that you're talking about, where it makes you do star jumps and stuff, because it can track that. I think that you can set it so that it'll keep on shocking you till you do the star jobs or get it the watch off, I guess.


And you like, you've got to have it like that, right? Because otherwise you would turn it off without potentially waking up.


So I was finding that way to hack it's like wait, but now it's not useful. Damn it.


All right.


Or also.


Yeah. It's interesting. I don't have a particular week that's, like, specifically on that. Probably mainly just because you don't have kids, then they're like but I imagine many things would relate to that. Would you be able to bring it up maybe next time we'll have a bit of time to chat? Because if I can get an idea for what the challenges actually are, there probably are things in various weeks that are to do with that, or we can certainly make time to talk about that because it will probably apply to various people.


We have to see what the particular challenges are. Sometimes it's about pulling away and doing life admin and stuff like that, as, you know, as a parent or whatever our role is. And sometimes it's about boundary setting with our kids who may have at least traits of ADHD because it's fairly heritable. And I've always joked that if I had a kid that was just like me, then I'd really get my servings because these are different things that are dealt with in different ways. So maybe if we can define what the main challenges are, then I'll be able to give more specific advice. It will probably be relevant to the majority of people anyway.


Sure. Yeah.


I would like to address this properly in the future, but I'll just add to what Nadia said there because it came to mind is that it's actually important. Like, it's so easy to get caught in the sense that as parents, you've got to be perfect in front of your kids, and the truth couldn't be more different than that in a sense. Like, it is about like especially given that for people with ADHD, your kids are likely to inherit some traits there, right? So you don't want to be showing them that it is not an acceptable thing to have these challenges, right? Like you want to show them that you can have those challenges that they may have with temporal or whatever it is. But even though they see it, they see that you deal with the challenge and that you're okay with it, so that when they have that issue, or if they have that issue down the track, then they don't feel terrible about it. Like, this this often happens, like jumping out of ADHD as a context for a moment. Often times people will, like, in their relationship as parents, not fight in front of their kids.


And then what happens is because they're like, oh, you don't fight in front of the children. That's not something that's appropriate. But then they grow up and they're likely then to get in relationships but have too much of an idealized perspective. So once they get into, like, arguments with their spouse, they're like, it's ruined. This isn't what good couples, good relationships do because they haven't seen that those kind of negotiations and compromises and stuff need to happen and arguments are okay. And that very much relates to this idea of the challenges within ADHD as well. It's not about being perfect. It's about showing the mistakes and that they can be gotten through.


Yeah, absolutely. Like, to have conflict effectively so that you're still putting one another first, but you can do it imperfectly and note that it's imperfect. It's just so that the child doesn't get this sense of like, you know, that never happens because they never see it or on the extreme side, this always happens and they're scary. Like, it's that kind of middle ground of like, okay, so they're people too. They have their challenges, but look, they're able to deal with it. So if they have challenges like that, they can do it too. So I don't know exactly how much that relates, Belinda but I would like to hopefully we'll find a time in the future to have a chat about that because it will probably relate to other people as well. Right, guys, I better jump off, but I'll catch you next week. All the very best.


Okay, so in the moment, what would be like a goal where you can pick certain times where you're doing a certain thing in order to get closer to the overall goal of decreasing that over time? Actually, first let us define roughly how much or you might even have this data from your phone. How much time do you spend scrolling at the moment? Maybe we could figure out here's where it is so that we can make it a reasonable achievable goal instead of being like, I want it to be zero from wherever it is. And then that might be sorry, I.


Yeah. So how many times a week has I'm guessing you got a physio who's given you exercises.


Okay.


Okay, so at the moment, zero. Yes. And this will be something to apply to everybody. And the hypothesis that you will entirely complete the goal has to be like, yeah, I'll probably be able to probably do that. So if you say, like two days or three days, what do you think is a goal over the next week in particular that we can review next Thursday for which the hypothesis is, yeah, I'll probably get that done.


But we want it to also be like, it's a good idea to set up the sustainability. One of the other things that we'll talk about today, which is relevant, is just that one of the things for people with ADHD that comes up a lot is the idea, like, look, I know I'm capable of doing these things like, once, twice, here or there, but I don't believe that I can be consistent over time. And the thing is that we can't just in some short term get evidence that you can be consistent over time, but it has to be built up kind of week by week. But we can break it down so it's like, well, a week, like even if we review it in a week, that's the start of consistency. If it's something that you believe that you can retain. Sometimes with people who I'm working with individually, we will actually set up like some tiny goal, like something that is very well achievable for them that it can do on a consistent basis just to prove to themselves that anything can be consistent. So if it's something that you want to do long term, so maybe two days is like a good start and then it could be like and another thing that we'll also talk about is like, we stick with one goal at a particular level until it becomes a habit and that's when we add on top of it.


But we'll get into that stuff as we go. Okay. And if you come up with the particular days, the particular times, or the particular actions that you want to take, and then to set reminders around that so that you've got those times when you know that you're most likely to be in a location that you can do those things that you need to do. So what action would you take in order to reduce that behavior for two other days? Sorry, I was jumping back into what you first said as an example. That's my point. Confused. Okay. With the physio stuff. How long does that take and do you do that? I presume at home.


Yeah. Okay, so when do you normally go to the gym and how long do you kind of budget to be at the gym?


Okay. And I'm guessing that the work that you would do is something to do with stretching and stuff like that to loosen up.


So you could even set an alarm that if you put in the address as the location of your gym, you could actually set an alarm that just goes off as soon as you arrive at the gym. And that might be like go straight to the stretch area or something like that. So there are different ways to have that alarm you could set at a time if you know it's going to be consistent, the time at which you'll arrive. But you can certainly in terms of the location as well, just so that even if you arrive at a different time, it will still go off when you go to the gym. But that's perfect. So two days a week doing those, you've got the location, you've got the time, and you've got the confines around what the reminder would be.


Okay, so, Nadia.


Work.


So, like, the overall thing that you would like to get better at in the long term, is that to do with the knowledge of how long things are likely to take to give the estimate, or is it to do with actually actioning the tasks so that you're increasing productivity itself?


Yeah, absolutely. Do you think in your case, would it be possible to, at the start of a week, estimate? Would you have a sense of the tasks that need to be done throughout the week that you could write down and put it into a timetable kind of thing?


So there's kind of two things in that to do with just gaining a better perception of how long things take. Imagine the best way to do that would be perhaps to like, even if it's one project that you've got throughout the week, to estimate what is the time that it takes, note that down, chunk up the time, and then particularly note so start and finish time of actually getting into that task. And just to know the difference between this is what I estimated, this is how long it actually took, and just doing that over time for people, even with just like one or two things at a time will just improve your sense of how long things take, even without really specifically thinking into it, having said that. And that would help down the track in terms of being able to think about what you need to do first, but that wouldn't be the most direct way to get to there in terms of gaining that ability to know when to start and to start quickly. My suggestion for people in that case is usually pick, like, to spend, say, ten minutes at the end of the day before just planning very quickly.


This is the first couple of things that I'm going to do so that you can stick that as a sticky note on your computer or just have that as a notepad on there. So then when you come in and you could even like, close down other programs and open if it's a computer task, all that kind of stuff. So when you come in you're like, right, this is the task. Get cracking. Like when I used to study and actually go into uni, especially because I wanted to chat if I wasn't constantly keeping myself busy, that I would always have, like, a notepad there with just, like, dot points of a couple of things ahead so that when I finished whatever task I was doing, there was no kind of floundering chatting for half an hour or whatever. It was just like, what's next? That good. So then it stops that moment. So I guess they're two different things in order to more directly move into one or the other part of what you're wanting to overall achieve.


Okay. Yeah. So picking I would pick like a day, a week that you're going to like not the whole day. Pick the day. Pick the time when you're going to be at the location, whether that's at work that you need to be or whether that's at home. Picking that time where you're likely to be at the location, you're unlikely to have competing activities at that moment. And sort out like, how long is it going to take me? Roughly just to chunk up either one main project that you've got, or you could even chunk up several ones so that you can monitor that and therefore have something to compare it to over time.


Sorry, I'm still here my camera, because I use a deal store, it does time out if I don't reset it before half an hour.


It could be, like, with the start of a project and you're monitoring the whole thing, but you could also be like, right, so I've got these few things on right now, or, like, of the eight, I'm going to pick a few, and then how much time do I think it's going to take me to finish it off? So that then you're actually still just getting a sense of, like so I thought it was going to take me 20 minutes. It actually took me an hour, and here's why. And if that's, like, a consistent trend, then you just start to, like and the beauty of it is you don't have to really be specific at, like, deciding to recalibrate. That actually just happens through the natural process of trial and error, in a sense, because this is how we naturally learn even, like, pre linguistically, like, before language. Okay.


Yeah, cool. All right, next, John. That's right. I just see the J. Baker, and I'm like, John.


Okay, well, we can't actually hear the vacuum cleaner. It's just do you want us to come back to you just so we can.


I think there were two.


So you've already started that goal earlier.


Authorities, to.


Too many things to do or too.


I think it was someone else, actually.


Okay, so how can there be like, a certain thing? One of the things is it needs to be specific enough that you can look back and be like, definitely, have I done it or not? And to what extent? You know what I mean? So it has to be like something tangible in that sense.


You know, everybody's got to be wondering what that is, right? Don't have to tell us.


Well, how many times, say over the last week have you done it though, to get an idea like this is our starting point. How many times you did over the last week just to figure out is zero the right one or is decreasing by something the right one? In the last week you did zero times?


I do think how hard do you expect it to be going back to that idea? The hypothesis has to be that you'll probably get it done. Is zero something that you're like, yeah, I'll probably get that done.


Addiction, just so you know, when working, of course a lot of this work is specifically for substances, but it actually works for any kind of process addictions like you're talking about, as well as the process of doing something where it is. There's evidence very clearly show that if somebody stops completely cold turkey, their chances of success in eradicating the habit is far higher than if they try to reduce. And in many cases, when people are very tempted into whatever behavior it is, they very well might. Not be able to do it the other way. Like often times I used to work at an addiction clinic, like as a psychologist up in Queensland Sunshine Coast. And like, people come in, particularly with alcohol, they'd be like, you know, I don't want to be like a nondrinker, I want to just cut it down. I'd be like, okay, fair enough. And I'd tell them about the stats to do with I think it's two or three times more likely the people are when they stop at Cold Turkey. I'd have to recheck that. But I'd go through this and I'd be like, how about we do it as an experiment where like we try for say, two weeks or X amount of time to see whether you can just cut down.


And if you're not able to, perhaps we can talk then about completely reducing just because they tend to like, if somebody is able to cut down, and I can generally see that if they're not like that kind of, you know, controlled by the habit, then they will be able to, but generally speaking, they won't be able to. So we'll end up jumping into that. And the reason for it is having a bit of it like having let's say if it's alcohol having like, you open a beer or you have one beer or two beers, whatever, that creates a risky scenario where you're far more likely to have more in the same with the game. That was a bit of a bit of a divergence, but hopefully that's useful to be useful.


Cool. Alright. So, yeah, so to not play that game and to tell us next week what the game is or you don't get the prize.


My favorite game growing up was like Zelda Korean or Time. And I have actually played out recently because there was a guy on the internet who ported Ocarina of Time into VR. So like, it's not perfect, but you can be in VR, in Hyrule and DA DA DA DA. Pretty interesting to kind of do something like that, which like, as a kid I spent so many hours playing and totally into to actually stand in it and go on. Like, that was my childhood.


Yeah. And it is much harder to play because with Zelda, the graphics, or like with Nintendo 64 games in general, the graphics only loads what's right in front of you. It doesn't load artifacts that are beside you. So when you can look around but the character is technically facing forward, then you're not actually seeing things that are populated unless there's a change to the underlying code. That was a bit of a detour. Okay, so we've got one there and you would just like, you would, I guess, come up with the strategy for how that would be done as well. I don't know whether there are many things you can put in place, but you would find, like, what is the time that I normally do that? What is the function that I'm fulfilling when I do that activity? Because often times it with any kind of addiction and also process addictions included. People will like there will be other functions that it serves. Like, for example, when people, like, say if they've been drinking on the weekend, they might have friends that they only see when they drink and they might only kind of, like, really, like have that kind of fun and socializing in that kind of way when they drink.


So for them, it's a matter of being like, so this is a function that that's fulfilling. We need to fill that function in another way so that you will be able to long term not engage with that as much. Another way is like, if people are they're more likely to do whatever the behavior is when they've had a stressful day at work. This might apply to you then. Escapism might be it or distressing might be it and it's like, all right, so what can I do to get that sense of escapism or distressing? Or what can I do to mitigate my stress throughout the day so that it doesn't get to that? But lots of things really quick, but some food for thought. James Hi I'm kind of struggling to.


I guess.


I find that it can actually be a bit hard for people to remember what that thing is because they've got so much like their brain is kind of like making them forget it in a sense, because you don't want to do that thing. But if you think, like, is there anything that if you did that, that other things get easier? Because you wouldn't feel as weighted down by the sense that it's not done. Because that can be all sorts of things. It tends to be like, that's the thing that you've avoided so much. Probably the thing that you're least keen on actually addressing, but it's the one that if you address that, everything else gets easier.


And that might very well be a good thing. Like perhaps if it comes down to that and it's very much lifestyle related, if there's like one thing that you did or didn't do last week that you would like to be different this week, like something specific that you can choose, that you believe that you'll be able to enact.


So one could be have a have a cutoff time for work after which you do none.


But.


I'm kind of catching up and so when would be the time that you'd be able to kind of see your family where people are home?


Our family and what time is that for your family?


Seven.


Okay. Just carving out that time. And so if we looked at the last week, how many times of the last week did you manage to be there for that dinner time?


Okay. Yeah.


And so is it because you're exhausted that time, or your head still and stuff from earlier?


But there's another classic thing you hear from people with ADHD, it's just easy.


That's not the stuff that's easiest for us. Right? Yeah. Because it's difficult and takes effort to make yourself focus on those things. Oftentimes the things that are more difficult aren't actually more complex or more difficult in that sense, more challenging aren't actually the most difficult things to get done because they're interesting. They pull your attention in. It's those admin things that and oftentimes it's shuffling around people's day so that people will often intuitively be like, right, I need to place the things that are most complex at the time that I'm most focused, so I can do a good job with those tasks. And for neurotypical people, that works pretty well. With ADHD, we should generally schedule the tasks that are mundane and boring for the times that we're most focused. And, like, toward the end of the day, potentially, we may still very well get focused into those things that are more complex because they're more interesting. It actually doesn't take as much effort and in a sense, like a push to do the things that are more challenging if they're more interesting. So maybe for you, it could be like looking at the structure of your day, looking at the times when you do those, and then picking, you know, some amount of days.


It could be two days or something like that that you're like, Right, I'm going to try this strategy, and I'm going to compare it to the other days and see whether it works better. It will, because I've done this before, but it will. But that's one idea. But the strategy was to pick the things that are most complicated, but may be more interesting, and to make a distinction between things that are more mundane and not interesting. The things like the most mundane and not interesting things, they're the things that you want to place into the times that you're most revved up and able to focus on anything. So that might be like just when the medication is most kicked in. It could be for some people it's particular hours of the day that they'll find their most focused, all that kind of stuff.


Do you actually have a time that you schedule throughout the day that you would get that kind of admin stuff.


I think the answer is no. It's like I will find a time to fit it in, which probably means it's going to be at like midnight. Right? So maybe it's actually finding like what is actually going to work that I could consistently do into the future. And maybe the next week is just trying a couple of options so that you can see whether one of those things are repeatable. Because I think right now, anytime that we're vague with the time that we're going to do things, particularly the things that we don't really feel like doing, they're going to be the ones that just end up wherever they end up. So it's not a surprise that's happening right now. Maybe just trying a couple of options that might very well work differently of where you could schedule that in. And maybe if you're using the Pomodoro technique or whatever it is so that you can get an idea of what's going to work best in the future that I can work toward making a habit that instead of just kind of like trying to get the admin done whenever you can between other things. Yeah.


Yeah, having the pormadora, having something where it's like, you know, I've got this task, I can get this done. Like I've got a time frame, but I can also get it done earlier because it's a finite amount of stuff that I can do. So then you've got the sense of being able to go and relax or maybe have a slightly longer lunch or something like that if you get it done early. So you've got the incentive to hurry as well.


Well, maybe a hyperbox person.


Okay. But yeah, cool. That's good. Caitlin.


A little bit of what?


It'S just.


So what is that overall big task that you're having trouble getting into?


Okay, so if you contacted them, would they probably then set a due date? Is that something you've been avoiding?


I've got my I can completely understand that. But having said that, though, we know that not having an absolute deadline, it might feel more comfortable because we can ignore it. But if we can set that absolute deadline, especially where there's accountability or something like that involved, then it will give you that, like, at some point you'll get revved up and get it done. Yeah, that's one way. There are other ways to engage with it, but that's probably the one that like, you know, it's like there's a point where you can't go back. Like you make that. It's like, okay, I've done that. Once they get back to me, I'm going to have a deadline. I'm going to have to do this. But only if you're willing.


Well, another way would be to don't think about doing the whole task so much as, like, I'm guessing with something that was an assignment from last year that you may not have looked at it for a while, to the point that you probably have to re familiarize with what's the assignment again? What do I probably have to do? So just ripping off the bandaid and re familiarizing yourself with the things might very well I mean, tends to make it easier to like to do anything else from there. Because right now, if you haven't looked at it in quite a while, then it's probably like it could seem like the biggest task in the world because you don't necessarily remember how big it actually is.


So how do you feel about making a plan over the next seven days to pull out the assignment? Like you would pick a certain day, a certain time where you know you're likely to be home if that's where you would normally do it. And he's like, pull out the assignment, read through it and remind yourself where you were up to before if you've thought about how you would get through it. And basically just like getting your head back into this is actually the assignment so that you've got a sense of the finiteness of the assignment and like, it starts to look like an actual tangible thing that you can complete again.


Cool. Alright, so I'll just call like, re engage with like this is something that I often do, particularly with people with ADHD, like, just to re familiarize themselves with anything that they haven't looked at in a while. I've definitely felt the feeling of like almost like in my gut of like, oh, I don't know that I haven't looked at it. And it just feels so big, even like when people have their summer holidays from university. And then it's like, at what point do you want to re familiarize yourself with the list of subjects that you've got in summons or whatever it is, so that you've got your head in the game and it doesn't seem like this uncertain, unknown task.


Cool. All right. Will? Yes.


As I said to meetings, yeah, what about this is an idea, like it could be inviting a friend around on the weekend so that you're doing something social that you're planning while at the same time somebody's coming over. So you've got something in between the times that the cleaner would come where you're like you've got the accountability that someone's coming over to make you clean up. Which by the way, is that's what I generally use is the best way to make me clean as well. I joked during the lockdowns and I'm like, well I joked but it was kind of true. I couldn't do that anymore. I couldn't just invite somebody over to make myself clean the place. But yeah, maybe that could be a good solution. Just kind of picking maybe somebody you haven't seen in a while or somebody you'd like to catch up with. And once you've invited them around and you figure that they're probably going to come, you have to clean, then.


Yes. And it could be that you focus on something more ahead like that so that you can plan in advance in that way. But what was I going to say? There no I totally lost that.


It might come back to me, right friend? Over the course of a week. And generally speaking, because we want to have some reasonably small check in time for any kind of goal that we have, then the only way to contribute to an overall goal like that. To have consistency is just to do it in that one week where it's something that contributes to the consistency. If you were to repeat it and it's something that is potentially sustainable, it's not too much. And then just to look back on that, you know what, that's a start of consistency and then to kind of keep on doing it because it cannot be done in any way in any other way than that.


Is there anything that you have in mind that you figure, yeah, I would probably have gone to that or I'd probably start planning that at this time in the past.


That'S one. That's gone, perhaps to dedicate some time, whether it be on the weekend or a weekday, where you just take a look at the things coming up, maybe even, like, make a plan to ask a couple of friends what they have coming up to see whether they have stuff that you might want to join in on, stuff like that.


Again, so you don't make it consistent in that one week. It's just that it's like we make something moderate enough, like a gold moderate enough over that week that you will be able to keep on doing it ongoing. So it's not like something that you can just do with the intensity of one week. Once you've done that, it's just being able to look back and be like to see that as part of consistency because it's the only thing that you'll be able to review. But then each time you just get further and further toward that sense of consistency that applies to everybody with any kind of goal around consistency. It's just like we've got to still define it in terms of some chunk of that, because otherwise how long do you have to wait? There's no time at which consistency is achieved because that's infinite in a sense, unless you stipulate some point. But I think it's much, much better to just see it over time and to realize that each step when you know that you can make another one, is going to make a journey. Hello, Belinda.


All right, what's the current time that you're roughly getting to bed? Getting to sleep and waking up?


Okay.


Okay. So that's a reasonable amount of shift to do what I would say, though, actually, I'll just ask. So if you were to get yourself to bed at 1030, do you anticipate that you'll be able to get to sleep at that time or you probably wouldn't be tired? Because, like, a lot of the time, people with ADHD in particular will struggle with initiating sleep.


So what are you doing that's competing with going to bed then, at that time, like, after 1030?


I see where you're going. I've got two suggestions that I think would be a good start. So one, just because the morning is a part where we can absolutely have control, in a sense, when people. Find it difficult to kind of, like, pull themselves out of bed at that time. One way to do it is to turn off snooze on your phone and set your alarm somewhere where you can't physically reach you from bed so that you are forced to get up to turn it off, where it's just going to keep on going, going because the snooze isn't there. Sometimes people are like, well, if they just turn it off and then go back to bed, which a lot of the time it just works anyway. But if they find that they go back to bed, then another way is, like, they might put the clothes on that they want to throw on in the morning, like underneath their phone, so that they pick up their phone and their clothes are right there ready to go. Another way is like so the waking up in the morning and getting rid of that kind of melatonin so that you're not feeling sleepy, like you go back to sleep again.


That only takes being physically active to the point of, like, walking fast with intent to the bathroom and going to the bathroom and walking fast back, as opposed to stumbling into the bathroom like we might do in the middle of the night. That act of intentional coordination will wake us up in some way, like hyperventilating.


Or an electric shock. But you got to win that. That doesn't seem like a place. But even hyperventilating is another one where people really find it difficult to get out of bed, particularly in the winter. They can, like, literally just like, sit up in bed or even laying down in bed if you hyperventilate, like, really for like 20 seconds, guarantee you won't want to go back to sleep. So there are different ways to kind of hack it like that. Another way would be like, once you've, like, you know, you've gotten up to grab your phone, you might be like, well, I'm not willing to, like, fully decide to get up. But it's like, well, am I willing to fully decide to just go to the bathroom and then I'll decide whether I go back to bed or do the other thing? The more little things that we have in between, the less likely you're going to want to go back to sleep. So that's the morning side and there are just techniques around there. And then I'd suggest at night time just having a novelty cut off so then you don't have to worry so much about, am I asleep yet?


Am I asleep? That's something that this is going to contribute to. But you don't have to be checking in so quickly because it's just like, you have that novelty cut off. I would suggest half an hour before the time at which you want to get to sleep, so about time at which you want to go to bed. So about 10:00 p.m.. And that just means like if you watch TV or reading a book or listening to an audiobook or anything like that, that you would do it with something that you've already read or seen or whatever. So that in a sense, sleepiness comes in waves. So there's this tiredness or fatigue that occurs depending on the things that we do throughout the day. But we can be really tired and not get sleepy to the point that we can go to sleep. That sense that you're like, yeah, I could go to sleep at this moment that comes in waves. So if we are, say, watching something that we want to finish or we're reading a book and we want to know what happens at the end of the chapter, if we like, get sleepy and then we finish that section, we're likely not to be sleepy by the time the next section is finished.


So then we've got to wait for the next wave in a sense, which is about 30 minutes to 60 minutes, depending on the person and how tired they are, the period of these. So the novelty cut off is primarily so that you've got something that you're willing to stop at any time, right? So no matter what that is, that's the primary thing. So just cutting off the novelty and working on the morning, that's going to make it so much easier to make this shift in the future without kind of taking on every single island at.


Well, I guess one is like the novelty cut off doesn't necessarily have to be an unpleasant thing. I do that, for example, where I'm like, maybe watching old reruns of Friends or Seinfeld or whatever, like, you know, I'll just like grab an old show that I used to like and then that will be my thing that I just kind of switch on whenever. And because I've already seen the episode, I'm willing to just kind of close it down whenever I get sleepy. And because it's like, it's not an inverse a task, it's not unpleasant or anything like that. Frankly, some of the time when I'm sleepy, I don't necessarily want to watch something novel or like get into some new movie or something like that. So, I mean, just making it so it can be a very pleasant transition where you're like, hey, I'm going to chill out. I'm going to watch something nostalgic or something that I've enjoyed in the past or something like that. So that the less aversive, the more pleasant it is, the easier it will be to repeat over time as well. I do suggest having an alarm for that 10:00 p.m. Time, and I generally get people to set alarms for that time like, coffee before they want to go to bed to just like, that goes off.


I'll start the routine. That could be with a shower. It could be with brushing your teeth, it could be with whatever. And then just do that relaxing thing until you get sleepy. Oh, and by the way, don't check the time after that point after the alarm goes off and, you know, it's 10:00 p.m.. Don't check the time until the morning because that tends to wind us up, get us frustrated. It makes us start, like, calculating the hours till the morning, dread the next day being bad because we haven't slept well. It tends to be very helpful for people who otherwise kind of check and get frustrated and revved up to actually not look at the time throughout the night. Okay.


Yeah. Well, just like the goal that is that you will feel most relieved after doing that you can complete over the course of the week.


And there's a couple have they told you not to do more intensive exercise?


Yeah. What times do you normally work?


Okay. And that's like two days each or something like that.


Some suggestions I have that might work for you, like yoga, of course, is one. There's apps, there's YouTube videos and stuff like that. Doing something like that, that's potentially new might be a good way because there's diaphragmatic breathing involved. That should actually lower that kind of adrenaline. The other one, like if you have any friends who live nearby or someone like that who you could be walking with. So there's a social element of just having a chat while you do it.


With housemates. Do you partner or anyone like that?


Are friends in the area?


Yeah. Like if you were able to do it because there are things, like there's an app like Zombie Run. Zombie Run kind of thing, but that's like, you know, makes it more entertaining to do jogging there. Of course. It could even be just like if the things that you've tried in the past aren't particularly wouldn't particularly work now, or you don't particularly feel keen on them. Maybe just like trying one novel thing that maybe you've thought about in the past or something like that, just to see whether that might be something conducive to using over time, like whether it's swimming or whether it's I guess you'd have to maybe brainstorm do some searching or something like that to figure out what fits within that. Not get your heart rate over too much. That is also going to potentially be fun or interesting.


Or even maybe even combining it with like because you can potentially make a bit more distance. Like if there's a park you like or a nice place to go and spend a bit of time. If it's not raining, that could be a good option. I do realize, guys, we're pressing time a little bit, but we'll get through everyone. I might have to run through the slides a bit after seven, but you guys will get the recording. I apologize for that, but we have pretty much everything in the slide we have talked about as we've gone through various people as well. Cass.


Okay, so you'll be reinstating your gym membership, which means that since it hasn't been up right now, I guess, so you've been going zero days a week for the last couple of weeks. So what do you think makes sense as, like, a reasonable increase from that?


Okay, so not the gym. Okay. All right. So increasing the amount of time and potentially being able to do it yourself. So that might mean having a chat to your partner or someone somebody who could take care of the young one while you're out doing that or something like that. Or in planning, like, the day and the time. How many days a week do you do that currently?


Okay, well, how about making it two days where you're particularly doing it for that bit longer and stuff like that. So it's not massively changing it because you might have to organize a couple of things and stuff like that, I imagine. Would you have to get your partner to look after like you'd have to sort something out there?


Yeah, 100%. Sometimes it even works for people, like if you've got other mums who are friends around, like if you like, you know, maybe one time you've got yours and theirs, like your kid and theirs, and then you switch. So you've got a time where you get to do it by yourself as well and it's just like an exchange. So you're like somewhere in the middle there, particularly if your partner is quite busy.


I was actually meaning it could be that you're going by yourself. You allow them time by themselves, so you're going with the kids there. By themselves, you just have the kids, and then another time they just have the kids. And during that time you could go for a walk by yourself type thing, but it's whatever works for you with the resources you've got, your daughter sounds like a good one to buy.


I don't I don't I don't know children yet. Just a pop.


Yeah. Well, hopefully that gives us a bit of a start. By the way, I realize it is seven guys. Does anyone need to go who hasn't had a chance to go through their goals yet? I know there are a few more people to go through. Is everyone okay? Just to answer the yes. Okay, well, I will jump back up. Roxy, are you ready?


My.


Sorry for cutting off. What situation in the past has allowed you to most reliably get your place clean? Is that like maybe inviting people over like we were talking about earlier?


I would like I can invite somebody over this weekend. Right?


They don't have to be over all day. And we need to socialize that. We lose productivity in every area if we don't do that.


Yeah. I mean, if it was me, I would definitely suggest the accountability option just because you can get a fresh start and then you could do, like, the smaller kind of routines. Because if you're anything like me, it's way easier to keep something clean, but once it gets to a certain stage.


I want to get to the point where I'm proud of the clean space and then I'll keep it that way. But once you get to the point where I'm no longer proud of the way it looks like it drops off. So that could be a way.


So have a think about it. You definitely got a couple of plans there that could be taken. It's just a matter of what you're willing. Okay, so we've got a couple more, so robert, are you there?


Yeah.


All right.


Book them in, because you've got a.


Just.


Yeah, so you said the other Simon is due tonight, so I imagine, like, it's already that time that you'll end up you got to do what you got to do. But maybe is there something that is coming up over the next week, whether it's due next week or it's due sometime in the future that you would be able to, like, after tonight, between tomorrow and next week to find something that you can book, like one or two sessions, right, whether it's on the weekend or in the evening or whatever it is, where you're intentionally maybe using a pomodoro technique or one of those techniques from week two to get in and to get something or to make some progress on something that's not quite due yet. Do you have something in mind that you might be able to work on for that?


Okay, so you've got to do that by Monday. So that probably means it would be a really good idea to like maybe Saturday morning because it's so common to like it's something that takes half a day. You got a weekend, it's going to happen the last half a Sunday, but then the other day and a half that you were kind of like, you don't get to fully rest because you know that there's that thing and they might be like, I haven't done that. And therefore and there's a feeling of guilt and stuff. If we can pull it down to, all right, what can you get done the Saturday morning? And you could even break it up so it's like a certain amount Saturday morning that you're going to plan using some sort of method and a plan Sunday morning, so it's a reasonably small amount of time, but then you've got that clear goal that isn't waiting until that last minute. So maybe a goal around that.


So then that might mean using a technique like getting everything ready the day before, just using. Five to ten minutes just to clear the desk. If it's a computer based task, close down things not related to it, open up things that are so that you've got everything ready and then that starting point the next day when you want to get started on the Saturday. So that could be something you actually set a reminder for. Plan on the Friday night, tomorrow night, and then on the Saturday you've got a running start. So that tends to be really helpful with that starting part. And if you find that you usually kind of get into it from there, then that might be all you need. Otherwise it might be a combination of a couple. But that's definitely something to try because like if the goal is trying something that you haven't tried, even if that isn't the thing that you end up utilizing in the end, that is a useful thing because you're gaining more knowledge about what works for you. Alrighty, Nolini, I think that will be everybody. Noini, are you there?


Even just like a PowerPoint anywhere. As long as you cannot reach it from just like doing a power reach from bed, then that tends to work. Especially. You've got to turn off snooze though.


So you just pause. So you just muted. Melenny, you still had no any, so you just muted.


Why do you want treadmill instead outside? Do you find that easier? I know it's like physically easier to do, but.


What time would you normally go to the gym? Is that first thing in the morning you're trying to yeah. So that's tied in with the getting up. You want to get up and directly go to the gym at that time?


When was the last time you went to the gym? What kind of motivated you to do it then?


So when you went with him, was that in the morning or in the afternoon?


Okay, so it was the same time you're wanting to do what I'm going for now?


Okay. When was the last time you had in mind that you wanted to do it, and then what led to not doing it at that time? Was it staying in bed and being like, you know what, it's warm here.


Once you're up, do you think once you're up, especially, like, having your phone sitting on top of some jogging gear, if you got up and then that was there, you could just throw it straight on? Do you think that might be a situation where you're like, I may as well go now because you're like it certainly makes it easier to take that step. Right? Because you're already out of bed, you're dressed, you're not like, in this cozy, warm thing. Cozy, warm bed, possibly still sleepy from the night before.


Yeah, I would have to kind of break down. Like, what leads to that rumination and stuff? I'm just aware of time. I think, what can we let's see.


Well, I mean, you might find it interesting. The term rumination actually comes from a physical action that cows do because cows eat fibrous grass. They have to break it down. That's why they have four stomachs, actually. They regurgitate their food and they chew it around. That's called ruminating before they swallow it back down again and kind of discussing you. But that's what we do with our thoughts when we're just, like, taking things that we don't have control over that upset us and then just, like, ruminate around with them and then just kind of tuck them back in. Nothing's changed. I mean, procrastination can be paired with rumination or not. That's one potential propagator for it. It might be just, like, a suggestion for somebody else earlier, like trying one or two strategies over this week, whether it be, like, accountability if you can get a friend who you can meet or even, like, see somebody. At the gym who goes there at the same time and just be like, hey, do you want to, like, let's keep each other on track, or something like that? There are these different ways or maybe like, grab the slides or grab the video from week two and be like, all right, which ones are these?


Or which one of these should I try? That I think will be most conducive to helping me get to the gym? That kind of combines yourself in the moment type thing. So definitely the things of, like, alarm clock outside of bed wiki joggers to whack those on at that time, potentially to have, like, if there are other people in the house who you could kind of, like, tell, this is my intention, give me a kick in the butt if I'm not out the door type thing. I guess there are these different ways that you could try. I would need to spend more time kind of like, talking about what is the nature of the rumination, what is causing that, and what might be able to help and stuff like that. I would need a bit more time. I could potentially talk to you about that in the future, but maybe just try a couple of things from week two and then at least if one of those works, you've got a clear way forward. And either way, even if it doesn't, the goal is not to make it work. The goal is just to try these things out and see whether they work.


Awesome. So, guys, I realize I'm over time, so 717, I could jump in and do the slides now, but honestly, we have covered the content of it. Another option is I run through them in ten minutes next time. So it'll be like revision from the things that we've talked about here and there today, just because that's a thumbs up. Cool, because I can see that somebody has left as well. And I'm like that'll work. Because I really do think that we've covered pretty well. All the details will be a revision, so thanks guys. Sorry we went a bit over. We'll figure out who gets this next time as a group. And all the very best with your goals, guys, while I'm just packing up. Happy to take any questions or anything like that. All good. No? Alright you then. See you next week. See you next week, guys. Bye.

me
had a good week of smashing your goals and everything? Let's see. I'll just crack back into this slide from the beginning. Cool. So, of course today we're going to be going through and reviewing the goals that we came up with last time. And so after we kind of get some time to go through everybody's goals and we can figure out how we decide who gets surprised and stuff like that, then we'll talk about things like the self compassionate way to review how your goals went. Because it is so easy to get caught into the false dichotomy of like, if I've either 100% achieved it or any deviation from that, like 90% is zero and just seeing it as a complete failure. So being able to pull back and very intentionally actually look at our goals and to celebrate them in some sense. Because noting that an aspect of ADHD is that under regulation of dopamine that we have less of that. Intrinsic tendency to feel good about the accomplishments that we have. And we have more of that sense of the suppression of dopamine leading to that feeling of disappointment when we haven't necessarily achieved that level.


I wouldn't mind if it was good.


I can encode things quickly, so if you go quickly, I can hear it.


My goal was not to play video games this week. That's right. And I'm glad. There's been a lot of really helpful things have been said because I was ashamed because I didn't go the whole week. I played for 45 minutes once, but that's better. Better than other time. And I can't how hard it was, and I reflecting now, I realize that when I'm if I've had a stressful day and I'm home alone, I'll blame. And every time that happened, I resisted until one time but the shame came in, not only because it kind of gave in, I reinstalled the game, didn't take too long. And then but also my partner was really angry and it took a couple of days for her to really understand it.


Yeah. And if there's something that we're ashamed of, we try and say about it, because we think that when he lives in the shadows, she got some Glenn Doyle.


But it sucked that she was quite angry, annoyed, maybe for me, maybe at me, I don't know. But it took a while to kind of really sync in with her that it was hard.


She did, yeah.


Yeah. Maybe I'll show this to kind of get it a little more. And I guess it's all the hard work. Even in the time that I played, I had hours of just like, no, now I am drinking tea, now I'm going to read the book, now I'm going to go for a walk. And all these things I was doing. I delivered all social media and I just chill myself out. And I guess in retrospect, actually, there's a lot of successes in that moment. Yeah. So I feel lot better about it.


Like three, but I had played for maybe collectively somewhere between six to 10 hours.


The last week, 45 minutes in total.


Three quarters of an hour this week and between 8 hours the week before, like 10 hours in total across the week before.


Yeah, like replacing listing and then replacing okay, thanks.


Setting everything up. Different operating system. Can you see the slides now? Thumbs up? Yes. Okay, good. So it's just 530 now. Wait till more people come in. I'll just grab some water. Just started early to get everything set up on the new OS.


How is everyone? Pretty good. Cool. Glad that sounds wrong. I wasn't sure. Sorry. How are you doing? Yeah, I can't complain after the work week, actually. It's been a busy time, but it's been a good time. I actually hired a coder to work for me a day a week, starting Monday, and I so interviewed her on Friday. She lives in the Philippines, so it's like outsource for a company called Cloud stuff really interesting to kind of see what we can build together, like apps wise and stuff like that. A few things that I've been working on. That's cool. The online are sort of the opportunities are nice. Yeah. Well, there's this there's an AI called GPT-3. So this was developed by a company called OpenAI that was cofounded by Elon Musk. It's a huge, like, essentially you take, like, a text prediction AI, the kind of thing on a really simple level that pops up on your phone to say, like, what words you might mean next, and you can just press into them. But it's trained on 175,000,000,000 parameters where a parameter, on average is threequarters of a word. So then we're talking about, like, 130,000,000,000 words on the Internet, which it was trained.


And what they found is that by training it on more and more text, it just kept on getting linearly better as they went up at recognizing through a very small amount of text, the background, the type, like, what would come next, because that's what it does. It's like, here you've written something. What would come next, but you can use that to kind of manipulate in various ways based on the kind of text on which was trained. So you can get it to it can be like, here's an example of a shitty essay, and then you have, like, a title of a good essay or whatever it is based on that. And it can take that and be like if it would expect to see a good one or say, like, here's an example of a C essay, and here's an example of an A plus essay. You can take your essay and throw it into the C one and then see what it would give back. Well, there's plenty of different things. Like, I've been using that to help write a book. So I've been writing a book recently. But one of the apps that I have in mind uses that, for example, and I want to take some of the video data, some of the videos that are previously recorded for these groups and just as training data.


So I'd take the video, convert it into just audio convert that using Google speech to text into speech. And it encodes, like, speaker one, speaker two data, so I know who's me, and then I can get it to mimic me by saying, like, if I say something that's not in response to somebody else's question, then it will just be like, blank on the left, and it will be what I say on the right because it's all paired training, as in, like, input, output pairs. And then if somebody says something to me, here's a question that I can respond to. And so it'll be the left and right based on that. And then you've got thousands of examples of that where you can then take that and very accurately, potentially even to the point that would be very difficult to distinguish that from me even by somebody who knew me well. I could set it up as a chat app, basically. So you go in there, you've got your AI ADHD coach, and then you could ask a questions and get back the answers that I may very well give. Wow, that's amazing. So that would be be cool.


Yeah, right? It's crazy.


I intend to be upfront with like, hey, I wrote this in conjunction with this AI. But nothing is plagiarized. Everything is completely unique that it develops on the basis of what I've written. So like any kind of unique text that I'm putting in, it's going to be like, all right, based on what you've written there, this is what might come next and everything's going to be completely unique. And even though I'm writing a book called 2084 based on an updated 1984 in a sense, and so because I want it to be in a similar style to the original, I actually took I took the text of every book that George Orwell ever wrote, which is about 500,000 words. And I use that to post train it, as in to fine tune it in the way that I was talking about with the trained pairs. You have that all on the right. And then what that will do is allow it to like it's still going to be like it gets an input from me based on prior text that it's going to be predicting the next text based on, but being fine tune on or Wells writing.


That will be the stylistic, if a company, say, has a company voice and they've got tons of marketing spiels that they've done in a particular voice, they can take all that in the same way as I've done with allwell's texts and then get it to provide marketing spiels based on the same kind of voice. So it's essentially taking the voice of Orwell. So it's like if Allwell wrote a book and he wrote what I wrote, what would he write next? That's essentially what it's going to give me. How would he word it? How many what and how would he word it? How would he phrase it? Yeah, exactly. So it just feeds me back text that I can and I can throw in, like, there are different ways, as I've said, to kind of manipulate it so that you can get like, I can throw in a paragraph and get it to spit me out. Like, say, I want that to be more succinct, or what I very often use because my experience with writing is mainly like, scientific, very succinct, brief writing. And of course, like, being in the novel space, there's a lot more description of things that aren't necessarily absolutely key features of the primary point.


So I've been utilizing that or like, write something that says what I wanted to say and then I'll say, like, provide more descriptive so it can expand it out a bit. So it includes what I've written as well as like, chunks in the middle that add some extra description to the scene. Yeah. Amazing. So it's been an interesting process to kind of really fun using GPT-3. Yeah. Sorry guys. I just started talking about a couple of projects that I was working on. All right, so I think that we've got most people here. So this week is going to be the second edition, essentially of last week. So we're going to be talking about healthy life, healthy mind, the kind of kind of baseline performance or training aspects that we can do on a regular basis that are going to improve our overall ability to live the lives that we want to live, to control our impulses, to feel emotionally stable and all that kind of stuff. So we talked about the diet and the exercise, the fun, the me time and distressing and things like that. Last week. This one we're going to get into.


Let's jump into that slide and move this slightly older. Okay, so we'll do a reflection today just quickly, just on sleep, diet and exercise from last week just to see whether anybody had any kind of functional questions that they had or application questions to those sorts of things, to their lifestyle or anything like that that we could go through. And then we'll talk about social interaction. FUNOMETER. Okay, so that's day and mindfulness meditation is going to be a very big part of what we go through today because it is extremely effective for people with ADHD in particular. And essentially all of the primary differences that can be problematic between the average person and somebody with ADHD or vice versa, somebody with ADHD versus the average person is all of those are built up by mindfulness meditation. It's essentially, if there's a very specific non pharmaceutical cure, this will be it's. Like this exercise, diet and stuff like that, really, really super crucial. But I'll go into the detail of the difference between different styles of meditation that are often mislabeled as mindfulness meditation and why they're not quite the same as well. All right, before we just crack into that Pomodoro, does anybody have any questions at this stage?


Trains somebody with ADHD? Yeah, there's not a whole lot of difference. So an ADHD Coach is going to stick to the stuff. I guess the bulk of the stuff that we talk about, say, in this group, like not necessarily getting into trauma and the deeper sides of things. So they would be more about specifically efficiency and being able to get stuff done and the strategies like the Pomodoro techniques and stuff like that, rather than because that kind of stuff happens with a therapist as well. But you also do anything else that's going to relate, whereas an ADHD Coach isn't clinical psychologists, they're not going to necessarily like they're not going to be able to do all those other things. ADHD Coach is also not a protected term in the sense of like so you can't call yourself a clinical psychologist unless you are one or you get a big bill. And even I have to pay $600 a year to keep my registration and to call yourself an ADHD Coach. Anyone can do that. That's an action. I mean, therapist, anyone can call themselves a therapist as well because that's just the act of doing therapy, which isn't a protected term.


Okay, actually just a really quick point on that. It's interesting to note the difference between a protected term and not with some of these things that we may think are like nutritionist. I bet some of you may think, like, nutritionist is like, yeah, that's probably something they have to do, study, maybe get registration for, maybe we assume that on the cuff of it, a dietitian certainly does, but not a nutritionist. And that means that some nutritionists can be fantastic, but there is no kind of baseline, you know, the base training that they must have done type thing. Social interaction, fun and me time. So of course, exercise, sleep and diet are key components of stress management. No conversation about stress, be complete without social interaction, fun and me time. This is just getting out there, seeing your friends, making sure the things that you crave to do, and this will be different for different people. Just literally the client that I was talking to last, before I started the session today, he's fairly introverted and he was kind of like, wondering whether he should be trying to maintain more friendships. But I can see that it's not something that he desires and he has a partner and dah dah dah.


It's not always the same requirement for it. But you know what you miss and you know what? In other times in your life, when you've had that. Whether it be social interaction or like certain things that you enjoy doing or parts of good lifestyle that have worked for you in the past and oftentimes it's just a matter of taking the wisdom from what has worked already because everybody's going to be somewhat different. There are some kind of baseline things that apply to everybody, but the type of social interaction you have in terms of what really recharges you like for some people who are quite extroverted, getting out there and partying with a bunch of people may very well be right there yet. And then other people may more enjoy interacting with one on one or a couple of people who they know well. But you just pick out the eyes of it and you figure out what works for you. And just like anything else and like the things that we talked about last week, there's going to be fluctuations over time with these. Sometimes maybe you start a new job and you're overwhelmed and you've got to kind of temporarily drop these things off.


That's fine. It's a matter of sometimes rebuilding them if you feel like you've got the ball at some stage and some of these things kind of end up not being the case for a bit. But it's just a matter of while you're doing these things regularly, the propensity to deal with things immediately and therefore not be procrastinating about them, the propensity to have a nice, like a steady emotional kind of stability and all that kind of stuff. All of those things will be more easily attained when these things are happening in the background. Fun all work and no playmacks. Jack and oil boy have more fun. It makes you deal with stress, feel happier, lose you temper less, it lowers cortisol levels which helps you sleep, therefore improved memory and overall performance. It's worth noting that anything that's going to improve things like the quality of sleep and whatnot that will improve your actual capability intellectually and physically and everything like that. One of the quickest things when people lose even as much as like if they're an eight hour sleeper and they get 7 hours as much as an hour of sleep is enough that you can tell with a reaction test from one day to another whether somebody is sleep deprived.


Like in a simple reaction test. You don't need any fancy things for this. Get yourself a ruler and hold it so that the zero mark is at your fingers like somebody else holding it. Sorry. And then when they drop it, when you see it dropped, you grab it and then you just measure that distance and you'll notice that distance is longer on days when you're sleep deprived. And it's not just reaction speeds. It's our ability to make ourselves focus on those things that are really challenging or annoying or unpleasant or mundane. It's the ability to utilize to utilize anything for which we need resources. So relationships, and I'm sure you all know this too, we feel happy when we're around friends and loved ones. Good relationships make us more resilient to depression. They increase connectedness and general mood. And isolation on the other hand, leads to leopardy and low mood over time in general and oftentimes it can be a slow burn. I certainly noticed that over the course of lockdown where even for myself, I remember like thinking after I've been in lockdown for a couple of months I was like, yeah, you know, things are fine.


Like it had been a slow enough burn that I didn't really realize that I was feeling a bit less kind of energetic or into things than I was. And then I went and had a great weekend with some friends and stuff like that. We just got out of lockdown for the weekend or whatever and the amount that I was uplifted that I felt better made it very clear that slowly and gradually I had lost a bit of enthusiasm for things just through isolation. And I noticed that this was true for many clients that I had over that time as well, particularly those who may feel a bit of social anxiety or whatever. So there's some sort of propensity to be like well that's a bit stressful, I don't have to do that, I won't socialize. But it can still over time lead to a bit of like you just feel less in, less in life, less in with other people, I guess, in the meantime. So I think that picture pretty much says it all. It's not necessarily a physical activity, you could have me time that is that, but it could be a place that you enjoy being.


Changing up your environment is a really good idea, and particularly if you've got a place that is associated for you with clearing your head or something like that, it's a really good idea to make that a regular part of your, say, weekly regime where you just have a bit of space, a bit of time on your own. And of course this is going to be more difficult for some than others say, like parents and so on but probably more important as well because you have a lot that you have to pay attention to, a lot of reliance on you and everything like that and it just means more cause for having a bit of a break sometimes. So take time away from tasks, schedule time in to go and unwind, give yourself a little moments of relief and reflection. This is crucial for performing at your best and enjoying life, especially with ADHD. So in the next slide from three weeks ago, the rest is important. That lower tension rest. And it's particularly important for us because, if you remember, the analogy that I gave was like, if you're building a fence, some physical activity that's strenuous on a hot day, you're not going to go to the gym on your lunch break if you want to maximize your performance in that particular domain.


So when you're utilizing yourself control as much as you possibly can to do whatever task, it's a really good idea to spend your breaks doing something where you're just kind of wandering around. You're not imposing structure or you're not imposing things on yourself during that time so that you can rest that muscle, so to speak. It's only muscle, but you know what I mean. So attention is a limited resource. We all run out, not just people with ADHD, but brakes should not be attention heavy, even games, because they can be quite attention heavy. Even if you're really interested in potentially draining. If you've got other tasks that are using a lot of self control. I'll just jump into that. We'll have a quick break. I must have taken out the slide that was like and relax. Does anybody have any questions about any of those or comments?


More like, yeah, well, that doesn't have to always be the case with fun. Definitely if you're doing something that is attention heavy, the brake really needs to be not attention heavy, but oftentimes it's a matter of fully doing something so that you can efficiently get a break. Like oftentimes, particularly when we're feeling, you know, we're feeling a bit drained. Maybe it's been a really big day or a really big week at work or something like that. We're going to be more tempted at those times to just be like, okay, just going to flick on Netflix or whatever it is. Which can be like that could be a perfect thing to do. But I've often recommended to people, particularly if they're highly wired by something that's going on, to plan out a time where it's like, all right, so I'm going to spend an hour and a half watching a movie on Netflix with my partner or whatever. Like, that could be an example. And I'm going to turn the notifications off on my phone so that we can really just chill. So then that might recharge you oftentimes or maybe going out and doing some exercise will actually be the biggest thing.


But it's like that's the last thing you want to do when you're feeling really drained. You just want to do something really kind of like easy or sedentary or junk food or whatever. Oftentimes I think people have a good intuition for it. It's like, how am I going to feel later if I do this versus something else? And you can kind of like feel it. You're like, yeah, I know that later I'm not going to feel that great about myself by just eat this giant chocolate cake right now. I'll feel good like now, but you know what I mean.


The.


Think.


Yeah, it's a good thing. Yeah. It's something that maybe as kids oftentimes we never have to think about it, but then you get more busy or you get ambitious or you've got responsibilities and stuff. And fun feels like icing on the cake, but sometimes it's the flour in the cake or it's the eggs that holds everything together.


Yeah. Like it's unproductive. Yeah.


I can tell from the way that you phrase that as well, there's a little bit of self punishment there. As in, like, I wasn't as effective as I think that I ought to be. And therefore I'm not going to let myself enjoy this proof of thought or you enjoy it and then feel guilty or feel a bit defensive at home because you had the funds. It's something that comes up, comes up a lot. And I think much more often than people tend to realize that aspect of self punishment. I've certainly done it given to myself. Like when I'm like I've felt like I haven't done I've been sitting there procrastinating or something like that. Or I had a plan that I wanted to do. I wanted to get some sort of admin or cleaning done or something like that. And then it's like, well, oftentimes people will have a plan that they justify in their mind as something other than punishment. It's like, well, I need to stay here between these. Okay. I remember the start of you remember the movie? What's it called? Limitless. So he takes like this magical drug that makes him super smart and all that kind of stuff.


Like the very start of that movie where he's just like in this apartment, everything's messy and he's like, my plan is to like if I stay here. If I don't leave, eventually I'm going to write something. It's like, bullshit. You've done that for three months, dude. Did it work? It's like, maybe look after yourself instead. And you'll end up actually feeling good and end up doing some stuff.


So I think that yeah, and it snowballs as well because once you've done that, then there's more self esteem issue and then like, it keeps on going. And the thing is that each time that we deny ourselves these things, like, like, know you fun or like getting out there and socializing and stuff, we are degrading our baseline. Oftentimes people will use as rewards something that should always be there, like exercise, like fun, like me time, stuff like that. And that's a really bad idea. I've often suggested instead to be like, well, let's say that you're doing some work. You feel like you haven't been productive or whatever it is. Maybe you're feeling down on yourself because of that. And some friends invite you out to lunch later that day. And you're like, you could do it in two ways. You can be like, well, I'm only going to let myself do that if I do X, Y, and Z work. But then you might miss out on that socializing, and then you're less productive the rest of the day. And the next day potentially because you're feeling lethargic and you missed out on that. What would be better is you're like, well, I'm going to go and take that break and I'm going to see my friends no matter what.


That's the crucial part. But I'm only going to get myself a caramel mocha late, whatever. If I've completed, whatever. And otherwise I'm just going to get myself a basic coffee, something like that. So that it's like you're bargaining with yourself with something that you don't that isn't essential. And we're just re kind of shaping that idea of what actually fits into that essential category to include things like fun and stuff like that. Because they all ought to be in that category. All right.


Yeah. I'm not in a rush. I'm just like.


Do you remember the context in which.


This is particularly with the adrenaline response? Well, you'll know, it on days where, let's say that maybe on a day that you've got an exam or you imagine having an exam, right, at the end of the day, kind of the worst timing, right? Well, maybe depending on the person. But like, perhaps for the whole morning, you're like, you're stressed out. You're at that kind of level of adrenaline that's in the background because you've got that anxiety about it that is burning energy in the background and in no way improving your ability to function. Right? So then you get to the end of the day and you're quite depleted. And the difference would be like, the thing is that cycle that people go through of like, high adrenaline and then down, which is a healthy, normal cycle, we do that when we go for a run. Your body doesn't do vigorous activity without adrenaline, so it's a normal process that should occur when we're exercising. So if we were to rev ourselves up, do the pomodoro thing, 25 minutes, and then we go and chill and have a Coke and a smile, I don't know, like that, then you can tell that there isn't that depletion at the end of it.


Talking about burnout in particular. So I don't think that burnout has a whole lot to do with working hard necessarily. It's an aspect, and it's often stated as the primary aspect, but if people are working hard but they wholeheartedly feel that it's worthwhile and that it's driven by what they truly care about, they will never be burnt out. If they feel like their face is under the foot of another person and it's been there for years, they're going to be burnt out.


This would often happen in the context of either consistently getting annoyed about things, like having a really low threshold for losing Kemper so that it's like constantly getting revved up, never quite calming down. Or even more commonly, when I'm working with people who have anxiety about things, oftentimes their baseline never quite settles down because they're stressed about the possibility, the sense of looming disaster around the corner and that kind of thing.


Yeah, it's hard to define and say, like, this is going to be the distinguishing factor, but by how you feel afterward, like, you get adrenalized, you get stuff done, you feel like it was worthwhile later that day, you look back on and feel good about yourself. That's not going to lead to burnout. But if you look back on it and you're just like, I'm working my ass off, and what on earth am I bothering to do this for? Then that's the kind of situation that leads to burnout. So that's like a life stress or work stress without fund, without these other checks. Yeah. Without the sense that it's actually meaningful or. Worthwhile, we can push ourselves to the absolute limit doing something that we're really passionate about. And that's fine. But yeah, especially like working in an organization where perhaps there's a bit of bullying environment or like, your boss is pretty unfair with people or that kind of thing often accelerates the process. This feeling of unfairness, resentment, lack of fulfillment, these are highly associated with burnout over time.


Yeah. I was watching an interview the other day on in fact, it was like a week. I may have mentioned it last week. For whatever reason, it was so like a high level program being interviewed. And he was talking about, like, the fact that he's like, he's an extremely hard worker and has been for decades and decades. Through his entire career, he's considered one of the best coders he's ever lived. And so he was being asked about this idea of work ethic and burnout and stuff. He's like, yeah, no, I've never been burnt out, and I've always been intensely working in this kind of thing. But if I ever get bored in one thing, I've always got more things to jump into. Ring a bell? But it's worth noting that those conditions don't tend to learn, don't tend to result in burnout. When people feel like they are autonomous, they don't tend to get to the point of burnout. It tends to happen when there will always be some sort of disgruntlement or some sort of pointlessness sense or something like that at the beginning that gets kind of exacerbated as people feel trampled. It's kind of defeat our essence, and it does lead to much lower empathy for others and stuff like that because it's just like, overall, this all right.


Yeah, of course.


But the emotional volume for people with ADHD, regardless of whether it's happiness, sadness, anger, anything like that, is always going to be a bit higher. Just because if you kind of imagine you imagine the prefrontal cortex and particularly the parts of the brain that are less utilized with people with ADHD. So, like, they're really inhibitory parts. These are very much about, like the hindrance is driving forward. This is kind of like the base of who we are, our passions, what we care about. But if we're ever thinking in terms of linguistic fashion, this is our prefrontal cortex. This is the executive of it just being like, by the way, this guy is calling all the shots and this guy is the servant. But it's like there is less inhibition and pushing down of this. So then whatever emotions there are, are going to be felt in a stronger way for people with ADHD in general. Now, I mean, temper is just one aspect of it and it's worth mentioning that not every single person with ADHD has any degree of temper. The impulsiveness comes out in different ways. We see that in a similar way with like alcohol consumption and aggression where like overall, if you take the average, then when people consume alcohol, they're more aggressive.


But we know that there's clearly a mediating dichotomous variable that's forget about the technical, but like there's clearly it's clearly only true for some people and not for others. So for some people it doesn't matter how much they drink, they'll become more impulsive, but they're not going to become aggressive. And it's when they don't have the baseline of internalized annoyance that gets exacerbated. But then people who do have that internalized annoyance that will come out and be more on the surface when they have a few drinks. Does that make sense? Like, it's a similar kind of analogy, because as people drink, their inhibitions are lowered and that, you know, that they have less kind of that push back, which is, you know, it's why people tend to, like, be a bit more chatty and stuff like that when they drink, if they're enjoying it, because, well, I guess they're a bit more like us in some sense. Not the dopamine if we're under regulated with dopamine and alcohol increases that. But in some ways does that help.


We've got time now. Okay, let's see. Glyphosine, Clonidine, dopamine, oxidase inhibitors I'm familiar with the Clonidine and male inhibitors. I'm not familiar with Guanfacene, at least not by that name unless I'm familiar with the drug names. What led to this list in particular? Just to kind of start with that foundation.


Okay, so he suggested these particular ones as potentially helpful for inhibition in general. Clonidine is generally used well, it's used at much higher dosages as an antipsychotic medication, but at lower dosages, much, much totally different class of dosage. Then it can be used in a similar way for something like Saraquell to help with emotional kind of impulse and temporary regulation and stuff like that. Essentially the felt effect. Like, I've worked with people who have taken these types of medications and they tend to report, like, it works, it can be a bit addictive. It's not something that I don't think it's the only avenue to get there or anything like that. It's not something that I've ever actually recommended to people that they should look into it myself. But it does work similar in terms of overall output to something like a benzodiazepine. It's not a benzodiazepine, it's not of that class. It's a bit stronger and it works slightly differently. It can be very helpful for people to get to sleep as well. Dopamine oxidase inhibitors or mayo inhibitors, one that's going to work on so monomene oxidase breaks down Serotonin, right? So after we've utilized the Serotonin, that breaks it down so you don't end up with too much.


This is a very, very important function because Serotonin syndrome is not a good thing. When we have too much Serotonin, that can cause permanent brain damage. That's not going to happen by accident in general, unless you're taking medications like these. Dopamine oxidase inhibitors are actually very, very rarely given because of the degree of risk that they propose. And it's not risk due to them being toxic or anything like that. It is the risk if people consume. So Serotonin is primarily fabricated in our body from tryptophan. And tryptophan is in a lot of different foods. Milk, almonds, like any kind of dairy, meats, almonds, bananas. When people take Dopamine oxidase inhibitors, they have a laundry list of foods that they have to stay away from because if they were to consume those foods at the same time as taking on aminoxidase inhibitors, then they can end up with Serotonin syndrome. It's just an unnecessary risk when there are other things that up regulate Serotonin anyway. And it's worth noting, just jumping back to ADHD and the neurochemical differences, dopamine and Norepinephrine are under regulated in general for people with ADHD, but not Serotonin. Having said that, I mean, people with ADHD, just like neurotypical people could have lower Serotonin.


This is something that fluctuates, I've talked about it fluctuating based on the perceived presence of the need to be competitive versus everyone's got what they need type thing. The most common, if there is some sense that somebody needs an upregulation of Serotonin and they're going to start with like Si teleprom or Floxetine or something like that, an SSRI, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Now, just for those who are interested fairly quickly the reason why it's called a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. So the selective part is just because the initial antidepressants that were available are now called tricyclics. They increase the cycle of norepinephrine, dopamine and serotonin. And they were effective antidepressants but they had more side effects. And then they developed one that would selectively increase the regulation of just serotonin primarily and not do too much to the others. And they found that they tend to have lower side effects and do the job for most people. In fact, like, very, very, very few side effects. Most people with SSRIs, the reuptake inhibitor part is just that. So we've got between two neurons. You've got the presynaptic neuron, you've got the post synaptic neuron.


The synapse is that little gap. You know, that's about one you know, it's about a microns. It's a very, very, very small gap. In between that gap there will be a release from the presynaptic neuron of serotonin and other neurotransmitters and they sit in there for a certain amount of time and then a re uptaker. So it's like, you know, availability there for a bit. Boom. And then the amount of time they sit in that gap, the higher that is, the more likely the postsynaptic neuron is to actually utilize the serotonin. So the react inhibitor allows the neurotransmitters, particularly serotonin in this case, to stay in that synaptic cleft for longer and therefore increase the probability that it is utilized by the postnaptic neuron. And so the cycle goes. It doesn't have an impact on the production of serotonin. But often for people when they have, you know, low mood and stuff like that, it's not actually related to a problem with the production, but the regulation of it due to the rapid inhibition monome oxidase inhibitor being that it inhibits the production of the monoamine oxidase, which breaks down the serotonin, that's going to increase the amount that we have available.


So it does a similar thing to like overall, like we have more serotonin availability because of it. So it does a similar thing in a sense to the SSRIs and other medications that increase serotonin. But it does it in a different way because it does it in a different way. It can be risky and that's why they don't jump to that unless they're like basically they use male inhibitors when nothing else works. For those who are interested in psychedelics and understanding that kind of stuff, by the way, Iowasca, if you've ever heard of like ayahuasca doing in a South American jungle, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah iowaska is a combination of DMT, which is dimethyltryptamine, just a highly active serotonin Mimica which is utilized just like LSD, but it's stronger. And but see, the thing is like dimethylryptamines normally smoked and it lasts about 20 minutes and your body gets rid of it really quickly. That's combined in Ayahuasca with monoamine oxidase inhibitors so it stops the breakdown also of the equivalents to serotonin, including dimethylryptamine, so it stays around for longer. So instead of 20 minutes, like 10 hours, and it's way more intense.


But that's a side point.


Sorry, was there a question there? I didn't quite catch that.


No, that's okay. Yeah. Jumping back to the initial question, nelini the idea of these or other medications in terms of the effectiveness that they might have for emotional dysregulation. First of all, my first Tact would always be therapeutic and I mean, I guess as a psychologist, but like generally speaking, when people have challenges with temper and stuff like that, most often dealing with the aspects that may be related to it, like trauma dealing, like understanding the early warning signs and stuff like that. And next week, by the way, week eight is going to be primarily on inga. So we're going to get in the heaps of detail about that, not the pharmaceutical side so much, but the various aspects of understanding what anger is and being able to relate to it in that way. There are different like anything that's going to improve your quality of sleep or anything like that, of course is going to be helpful for all of these things. And while there are medications that are available that like that and there are other medications, benzodiazepines are often used to handle anxiety and decrease in generalization as well as quantity. And seroquelle, which is a more common drug of that class to be given to people.


Cannabis or even CBD oil is something that's starting to get some more lookians. Although all of these pretty much any medications are going to be addictive to some degree, there's always pros and cons people would tend to often for many people, they will actually after, say, one or two drinks, they'll feel calmer and perhaps see things a bit more generously or whatever it is. There are different things that may impact it in that way. There are a couple of vitamins and minerals that can actually be very effective in improving people's ability to handle that kind of stress and they don't have any side effects. So it is very common that people, when they have high stress the ratio of copper and zinc in their body. So, like copper and zinc, the amount in our body doesn't really matter independently. It's about the ratio between the two. If the copper zinc ratio gets too high, then people feel more stressed and they get more aggressive and stuff like that. And that actually overall decreases the amount of serotonin that we have. And you can rectify that just by taking a zinc supplement. You can speed that along by taking primrose oil, which is you get that in, like, capsules that are similar to, like, omega threes.


But primrose oil is very good when people have that high copper zinc ratio. And also if people aren't getting enough B vitamins, specifically vitamins B three and B six, these are very important for the product, for the building of dopamine, norepinephrine and serotonin. And they can often they can often get too low if people are excreting them too much for various reasons or they've taken too many antibiotics. So they've messed with their gut biota in some way because they're both only primarily absorbed through the enzyme production of our gut biodiver. Our body can't produce the enzymes to break down and utilize those B vitamins. But either way, for any amount that you can like just getting some vitamin b three. I mean, B three, b six, zinc and primo's oil. That would particularly for anybody who has an imbalance that's created for something that's going to cause problems in that way. Those supplements which are fairly inexpensive, absolutely over the counter and have no major side effects I say no major side effects only because primrose oil if people are already quite regular, then primrose oil can lead to a little bit of diarrhea in the same way as having a ton of fiber.


You know what I mean? But your system adjusts to that. Just like if you increase your fiber intake, then that could do the same kind of thing, but you'll adjust to it, just so you know. Other than that, no side effects. Alexander sorry, were you saying that copper and zinc levels were too high? The copper zinc ratio. So copper zinc ratio being too high. So copper is too high relative to the level of zinc. By increasing the level of zinc, that can come into balance. Got you. Were there any more questions about any of those? I know that I kind of jumped into a bunch of different areas that hopefully were useful. No, actually, may I ask you a question? So, apologies, I completely forgot about today's meetings. I've only just joined you in the last 510 minutes, you were mentioning medications. So I take a little bit of time to help sleep. Just a very small dose at night, which is helpful. I also was contemplating with my psychic, it's a medication called One Fussing. I think it's similar to quality and how it operates. Please do tell us about that because that was the one on the list that I'm not familiar with.


No. So what I know about it is one of the old school antihypertensive, so it lowers blood pressure, but it's no longer wait, is that also called catapults? No, caterpillars.


Have they found that it hasn't been helpful?


Just quickly. Nadi is that the guanfoce?


It.


I got to correct myself before I saw Clonidine and I confused that with a different medication, as Roxanne pointed out there. So Clonidine is the hypertensive medication that is also sold as catapults and that actually is not in any dosage drainage in any psychotic. It actually works differently completely. It's at different parts of the brain. It's an antagonist and an agonist of norepinephrine. So that it's going to change the regulation of it, but not particularly increasing or decreasing. It changes the regulation based on where it is. There is some evidence that catapults can be useful for people with ADHD. Some people take it only in no stimulant medications and some people take it with the stimulant medication. Particularly if you may be aware that one of the potential long term side effects of Dextroamphetamine and Ritalin is hypertension over time. So, like high blood pressure. Now, that doesn't happen to most people. It's just something that like anybody who's taking these stimulant medications just when you naturally see GP, it's worth just mentioning. Yeah, let's do a blood pressure check just to kind of monitor over time. So if you started to see it increased, then you chat with your psychiatrist and say that was happening.


Some people would use catapults here, particularly with the sleep of that feeling that you're awake and it's not necessarily related to stress and you're just like wide awake at 03:00 a.m. That's the kind of thing that people have often found catapults useful for. So sorry about that mistake earlier, but yeah, there are so closapine is what I was thinking of. And look, I mean, that was a very, very strong but there are many psychotics that have a very, very similar name. But yeah, so that's that one, that's a very safe, very inexpensive medication that, if you're interested, have a chat with your psychiatrist about any more questions, because it is an interesting topic, I know, for many of you guys. Is there anything more about like different supplements or medications or anything that anyone was interested in finding out before he jumped in?


It'S hard to say because of course this had to be completely managed by your psychiatrist.


Cancer and Vivians are the long acting forms of Ritalin and Dextroamphetamine, respectively. Most people would gravitate toward those and they're like the most kind of immediate effect, immediately effective for people. But there are plenty of people who have not had any joy from those, not had any benefit from those who would try something, who have tried. There are plenty of like bupropian, for example, is a non stimulant medication that upregulates both Norepinephrine and Dopamine. There's another one I can't think of it off the top of my head. We've talked about it before that just up regulates Norepinephrine that people often use. Catapults is another one that we're talking about. That's not a stimulant at all. There are options to try. I don't know how long you guys tried for and what the conversations were or anything like that, but you can always ask and have that chat with him.


Can I ask a question about concern? How did that go for you?


I went from Ritalin long lasting on La Rhythland long lasting 40 milligram to a concert of 30. And it was just horrific. It was for me, it was shaking, anxiety, made everything worse. So that was interesting. It was a lesser number. It was like a step up for whatever reason. Anyway yeah. Was like, well, too strong for me to consider. Yeah, it's very individual, but I think the baseline is just that. Yes, there are other options, but like you said, it's just a pros and consultation, mainly financially, of just deciding whether it's going to be, like, effective enough that it's going to be worth the extra money import. But it's one of those things that if it is effective, you find something that works, then you get to keep on utilizing that might be worth doing it as a one off and just being like, hey, you know, this is expensive, but I really want to have a chat about the other possibilities and stuff like that.


Yeah. The extra kind of benefit, I guess, of going in that direction is they're not as super high controlled as the stimulant medications, to the point that you have to just always get them from your psychiatrist forever kind of thing, because they're so well controlled. Something like caterpillars, if you got on a dose, if that works for you, for example, and you got on doses that work with your psychiatrist, GP can easily prescribe that. They prescribe it to lots and lots of people who are getting older, just as a hypertensive preventative.


Yeah, so it's not available in every state in Australia, so, like in Victoria, they can't do that. In New South Wales they can, but it is up to the GP because they have to fill out some extra paperwork and stuff like that. And they won't always say yes, so they don't have to, but, yeah, they can. It'll be like once you reach a stable dosage on something with your psychiatrist, your psychiatrist writes a letter saying that that's the case and then your GP can continue it. But, yeah, just not in every state yet. All right, I better jump into the mindfulness of staff. Pornodoro time. So, addressing any doubt, I understand that you may hear the word meditation and hear sit still with your eyes closed for ages. Maybe you've even tried and already decided that you couldn't do it. It's really not what you think, because there are many things that are mis packaged as mindfulness meditation, when there are other forms of meditation, or even not even that. So I'll explain how to do it without even being still. There are alternatives where you can actually. Be walking, eyes open and everything like that and get all of the benefits of mindfulness meditation.


So why is it worth it? So, mindfulness meditation is such a specific tool for ADHD. It's crazy. You get to focus on what you decide to do more easily for longer. You control your impulses for distraction, anger, avoidable mistakes, junk food and drugs. It improves your resolve to exercise, work, get out of bed, stick to the goals we talked about, live life the way that you want to. And I'm not even overselling it because they've done studies where mindfulness meditation is the way to objectively because we've got objective tests for self control, for inhibitory control, things like you may have heard of, well, you may have heard the terms like the go no go test or the script test and things like that. The stroop test is like when you've got the word brown and it's either in the color brown or it is in the color incongruent to that like blue, orange or whatever. And you only press, you only say yes if it is congruent and you avoid saying anything. So you inhibit the response if it is not congruent. And because we know that it's all about what you practice, you'll do faster.


And we have a dual processing model of it's, like the processing and therefore saying the word that is written versus the color of it, they're going to be processed at the same time, but at different speeds based on how often we do either one. So we will read those words and voice the actual word that is in the text far more often than we will look at a word and say what color it is written in. And for that reason, think of the dual processing going like this. The saying the actual color of the word and ignoring the text of it is actually that, you know, that's the difficult part that we have to be here. But the point is there are objective tests and we can see that after doing mindfulness meditation we can absolutely verifiably see that selfcontrol improves. We also know that there are studies where like, let's say you take people who are obese and they've done this and you change nothing else but do mindfulness meditation. They don't even know that it has anything to do with weight loss. Measure their weight before and after. They will end up losing weight when there is nothing, no specific changes to diet or exercise or anything like that.


The only experimental protocols that they do in mind from this meditation and then they make better decisions on their own accord and they happen to lose weight and they tend to do it in a healthy, sustainable way. You consider how that may apply to any other aspect of your life. Okay, I'll just move this across a bit because the pictures rather important here. Okay? Isn't mindfulness just sitting there with your eyes closed no. So mindfulness meditation involves focusing on an arbitrary subject, which can be anything. It can be the breath, that can be a point on your forehead, it can be scanning through the muscles in your body, some arbitrary subject and redirecting your attention back to it as you notice your thoughts wander. It requires high mental input and you only get out what you put in by effort, not just time. And they've shown this in research. They could see that of the people who do regular mindfulness meditation, there's a dramatic kind of categorical difference in the amount of benefits that people have in their life. And when they do an EEG study to see how much effort is actually going on there, how much are they really paying attention.


The people who are getting a lot from it, they're actually paying a lot of attention. And the people who aren't there, they're kind of closing their eyes and sitting there and, you know, it's kind of like it's the difference between going to the gym and lifting up two kilo dumbbells when you could be lifting 20, it's like, well, you're not going to get stronger that way. You're certainly not going to get like the maximum amount of benefit by doing it that way. And the same thing goes, although externally you could look at somebody doing traditional mindfulness meditation and they look the same as somebody sitting there, but that's not what's going on internally. So a beginner's thoughts will wander often and it will take a while before they notice thoughts wandering, before they can refocus. So looking at the picture, this is from high in a Buddhism where we appropriated mindfulness meditation from, this is where it was foundationally from. And this image is a metaphor right down the bottom. You've got the guy chasing the elephant who's being led by the monkey. It's fire, they're racing everything's out of control. The monkey is your emotional drive, like your emotions pulling in whatever direction it wants to the elephant.


That's your thoughts jumping from topic to topic with this guy with no control over it, and he's just chasing it's, just trying to keep up. And then as it goes up, there is more calm, there's more stability as the metaphor of the elephant is changing color, as it becomes more calm, more harmonious. And ultimately it goes from catching up, being there, having some restraint, some inhibition there, and then ultimately reaching harmony together. And this is what can happen ultimately with our thoughts through practicing mindfulness meditation. This is the journey upward through the progress of mindfulness meditation. With practice, you end up focusing longer without drifting, and then you notice more quickly when you go astray. So it's kind of like you're still going to find after a while you're like, oh, I realize I've been thinking about other stuff, I'll return to my breath or whatever it is. But you will notice after a shorter period of time, after you've been training for a bit and doing this, that's one of the ways. And then you notice that it's easier to pull it in and then when it stays, it stays in for a longer period of time without you getting distracted and start going into another area, you're gaining more control.


So with practice, it is possible to calmly guide the elephant with full awareness. And Buddhist enlightenment involves mahayana Buddhism talks about enlightenment as being on top of that picture, where it is complete harmony with your thoughts to the point that you can do mindfulness meditation with the subject of absolute nothingness. Where the idea is that the more dynamic the subject is, the easier it is to focus on. Right? So if you're like, the breath is something that you can focus on the dynamic nature of how long the out breath is to the in breath. Or you can focus on the feeling of warmth on your nostrils as the breath leaves versus the cool as it comes in. There are plenty of things that you can direct your attention to and with more distractions, which can be setting up a situation with like you think of difficult poses that monks might be in as they're doing meditation. This is because that discomfort of being in that pose is distracting and that's a more advanced way for them to be able to maintain their focus in lieu of that. Right? So it's like more distractions and less dynamic focus to the point that the ultimate as you are decreasing the dynamic nature of the subject is going to be focusing on nothing at all.


So it's all meditation. Mindfulness meditation no, and many others often do are often mislabeled as mindfulness meditation, as I was saying before. So here are a couple of examples. Allowing your thoughts to wander anywhere to relax your attention. So this could be like imagine that you are just this is something that you might do as a low attention break and that's a very good thing to do to give yourself that break. It is not going to improve your selfcontrol, it is not enacting your selfcontrol. Allowing your thoughts to wander without emotionally reacting to train emotional regulation. So when you hear the metaphor of like imagine you're like a leaf flowing down a stream and you're allowing your thoughts to come in and go, you're not tying yourself to some singular, singular subject, you're just allowing it to go wherever it goes and what you're doing is inhibiting the emotional response to it. This is useful to slow down a bit and to not react emotionally. This trains that, but that also comes about with mindfulness meditation and to a higher degree plus other advantages. So I would just always suggest mindfulness meditation when it comes to that, conjuring positive thoughts and releasing negative thoughts in particular.


So this idea, one that means that you've got to first kind of defy the principle of the prior point and assign a value of negative or positive to it. So you are emotionally reacting in a sense when you do that. And then upon that decision, then you're going down that path and trying to correct your thinking bias towards the positive. This can be a really useful thing when people are really kind of down and stuff like that. There are other ways to achieve it and I tend to suggest other nonmeditation forms. Like it can be as simple as writing down a couple of things or thinking about a couple of things that you're grateful for. But you can also set yourself up in a situation in which you're likely to think about positive things. So let's say you're interested in painting or you're interested in photography or something like that, but you haven't quite gotten into it. Get into that and then you start looking for the beauty in the environment where you are for the opportunity to take a picture or something like that, right? And what that means is that you're directing your bias toward the positive just because you have a task that you're engaging with, that you're enjoying.


That happens to require that. So then you just have to focus on the task and it happens by accident, which is lovely, all useful, but they're not mindfulness meditation, right? So mindfulness meditation itself, and part of it was described just in the slide before last. But you also need to learn to recognize automatic thoughts, like these thoughts, these kind of momentary opinions that pop into my head like, yeah, I can't do this. Or like you walk into an environment, let's say you're meeting some friends at the bar and you walk past some people and they're laughing, it's like they're laughing at me, whatever it is. It's like a momentary opinion that you have that pops into your head at that time. They're the automatic thoughts and it's really important to be able to understand. People tend to default to thinking that these automatic thoughts are their overall opinion. They are a representation, a reasonable representation of what they really overall believe in value, which is total nonsense, right? We know that the mood that we're in at that time, just that momentary mood, is going to be more impactive than our overall beliefs. Primarily like our overall real values, what we really care about and think underneath it all then, in terms of the impact that it has on the types of things that we'll think about or the opinions that we have at that time.


You can think of like, you know, a time when you're angry and it's like really hard to see anything as like anything but unfair. It's like, they're wrong me, DA DA DA. And then later on you come, you're like, no, that was totally my fault. But it's hard to think about in that moment. It's like, well, you didn't change as a person, your mood did. And we know this from scientific evidence where we have the mood congruent memory bias is very, very difficult to think of. Other times that we were feeling happy when we're feeling sad and vice versa. So memories in which we had incongruent moods to the state that we're currently in, and it's difficult to remember other things that are going to change our mood. These are the two ways in which our mood is maintained to create some stability in whatever avenue we're in. But if we're in the avenue of anger or sadness or depression or hopelessness or whatever it is, then we don't necessarily want to stay there. You, when it comes to this, are the mind's eye. Your thoughts are like objects that you can imagine, like passing by the mind's eye to which you may attend or may not and you may react to or not.


Right. The duration of thought will be in your mind's view is limited, but you can't reduce it or increase it. Instead. The only way to actually decrease, like if you're having, say, a thought that let's say that you'd had a break up recently and you're thinking about thinking about the relationship in a way that's just rumination is just stirring you up and that's like, oh, I'm thinking about that again. So then it's like, oh, I'm frustrated. And then that frustration leads to a higher emotional reaction. It leads to more focus on it. There's a slight side point to mindfulness meditation, but it's an important point in general that there are two things that are going to increase the frequency of thoughts repeating on us, and they are a high emotional reaction and higher attention. Now you can't antiatent to something. So getting mad about it and pushing it away means that by pushing it away, that is fully attending to it, right? It is the deliberate nature of trying not to means that you have to select that object. It is the same as attending to it. And the frustration, the difficulty, the challenges that are there, that is the high emotional reaction combined with higher attention that's going to repeat on you all day.


The difference would be accepting, just being like, okay, so that thought itself isn't the threat. The threat is the possibility of constantly thinking about this to the point that it drives me crazy or like stops me from enjoying my life. That would be a problem. But the thought itself popping up is fine. So then accepting that the thoughts there and giving space for it takes away the emotional reaction. That's the hardest part. And then the next part is instead of trying to deliberately push it away, you're just focusing on something to the exclusion of because it's impossible to fully focus on two things at the same time. We can switch really quickly, but people never focus on two things at one time. There's no possibility for us. So it is simply just focusing on something to the exclusion of that, but not pushing it away because that would defy the acceptance. It is instead leaving room for that. You can be aware that that's there while actually thinking of something else instead that's either more useful or more practical or whatever it is. And then you're decreasing those two markers that are going to increase the frequency over time.


So you're actually eradicating the thoughts over time. That could be due to anxiety or rumination or whatever. It is important to know. All right, so demonstration a difficult thought threatening to pull you into an abuse. So when people are doing acceptance and commitment therapy workshops, they will often they will often talk about the what I just described a moment ago. But in terms of the metaphor of, like, imagine that you are imagine that there is a war being waged right between there are two sides. And you're thinking, well, the only way to stop this violence is to get in amongst this violence and to fight back so that I can win. But there is no winning. You just feed the beast. Instead. It's like, well, can you just, like, view it from a nearby rock? You can be aware of this battle being waged and let it snuff itself out. Stop putting fuel on the fire instead. Now, the way that this relates to mindfulness meditation, this is about so the actual meditation is about simply choosing any arbitrary subject on which to focus, whether it be your breath, an image in your mind, a mantra, by the way, a mantra will not be useful if you don't already believe it.


A mantra is useful where you believe something, but you don't necessarily think about it often enough to utilize that belief. It could be like, maybe you believe that. It's like, well, okay, I don't need to be as competitive, or like, this person hasn't ruled me, or whatever it is, but it's like it doesn't fully feel true. A mantra can help to bring that into your present day. But if the mantra is something that you don't already believe useless one or more sounds and that's the example that I'll give in a moment. That is a modified way of doing mindfulness meditation where you don't have to sit still. You don't have to be eyes closed or anything like that or scanning through parts of your body, like different muscles in your body and stuff like that. Which is often, by the way, the one that I would jump to when I'm doing it with somebody who's never done mindfulness meditation before. Now, note, if you're using multiple subjects, like, say, multiple sounds in the environment, there's no problem with having multiple subjects, but you have to be the one who decides when you switch. So it's not like, oh, I've noticed that, I so, like, let's say if I'm focusing on the two sounds of, like, my footsteps, if I'm walking and some birds in the tree, it's like, right, so I'm decidedly focusing for that moment on my footsteps, but then the birds in the tree catch my attention.


I wouldn't then just be like, all right, well, just go to here. Now you decide you keep it there until you've decided to move on to the next subject. All right, so the modified version, and it is just like this woman in the picture, basically. So when walking or sitting on the train or anywhere else, you can meditate even with your eyes open. Choose four to five sounds in the environment that are relatively constant, relatively. You can have spaces in between. Those are the moments where it's actually hardest, where it's like, imagine if one of the sounds is birds in the environment, but they tweet for a bit and then maybe those ones fly away or they stop. And then you're still focusing on when that sound is going to come next. You're still focusing on that subject even when there's silence. But it is more difficult to do that than focusing on something that is constantly available. But you pick various sounds. You focus for, say, a couple of minutes on each one before you intentionally decide when you transition from one thing to another. So you would focus on, let's say, footsteps and leaves rustling in her case.


So she's focusing on her footsteps and then maybe the leaves are rustling and she can hear the wind, then change direction. So then that pulls her attention in. That's when she would cycle back, just like any other thought, she would cycle back to thinking about their footsteps. And that act is exactly the same cognitive process, like cognitive act that we're making as doing mindfulness meditation. Sitting down. I shut. So make sure that you decide when to switch. I've said that you'll notice when your mind wanders to thoughts, things that you see. I think that I've said all of these different aspects just in a different order. Does anybody have a question about any of that stuff? I know that sometimes I would do a bit of a mindfulness meditation where we have time. We might be able to do that another time, but we have already reached seven. I hope that's okay. There are tons of guided meditations on like, say, the headspace app or like there's quite a good app that the army had actually like for psychological resilience that has some good mindfulness meditations in it and stuff like that. That's free. Does anybody remember the name of that, like battle smart something or no, that's okay.


If anyone's interested. Well, actually, let's talk to the group. If you have tried any guided meditations or anything like that that others might be able to access, do you have any suggestions for everyone?


Do you like one better than the other?


Try meditating for absolute minimum ten minutes for more than Marriott. When I have in the past done it very consistently, it was always 30 minutes sessions. I generally like, there's no problem with doing a guided one, but I've certainly always like I enjoy just getting outside and doing a non guided one. Like, doing a couple of guided ones can be a good thing to start with, and you could continue with there's no problem with that. But if you start with that just to get an idea for what they're actually doing, and then you can start to guide your own, even if it's not perfect when you start, and you kind of build that up over time, just gives you more kind of flexibility with the amount of time and stuff. And you can change it up with what you're focusing on and whatnot but yes, and you can find some good ones on YouTube as well, where people have done like a lot of meditations that maybe have some nice water sounds in the background or something like that.


Yes, I mean, like your environment with meditation. I think, generally speaking, anybody who I know who's really practiced a lot of mindfulness meditation will tell you how much it matters. As in, like, look, if you can do it anywhere, that's amazing. And it's night and day better than nothing. But like, going outside, I used to go out and I'd sit by the water and I'd do that. And that was always the practice. When I was at the kung fu school, I used to do mindfulness meditation sitting next to this brick. And I had done it for several weeks at that point, next to the same brick. And like, I realized that I kind of became attached to it. It was kind of like Wilson in that movie with Tom Hanks castaway where's my little buddy that I'd sit next to when I did meditation. And then one day I went down there and it wasn't there, and I was like, wait, where would it be? Oh, no, we did Hardshigong last night and some people were doing brick breaking. I bet you they went and they found it. And I was like, no, they broke it in behalf.


And I went and got myself, like, a little boulder to replace my brick. And I don't know, it was okay, but it was like getting a new puppy, I guess. Just a bit of a story there. So my only suggestion before next session is just to give while it's fresh in your mind, give mindfulness meditation a try at least once. And particularly if you don't find that you enjoy it one way, try to switch it up, try it another way. Maybe try the walking one or something like that. If you feel like you're like, I'm not going to be able to sit still for like a longer period of time, try one where you don't have to sit still because it doesn't have to be that.other
It does. Some of them are officially diagnosed with it. So I haven't tried any medication yet. Pretty resistant. So I actually was preferring to try this first, but I will try medication as well, just to see if it does anything good. Yeah, I think I've worked really hard to learn how to like because I work for myself at home as well and freelancing. So I have clients always go I need this now. And so many emails all at once and that I think it's probably hard for most people, but I find it really hard. And so I don't get a lot of anything done, which means I don't actually earn any. Money because I'm so busy trying to manage and organize, and I don't go on holidays because I don't know how to organize. That to happen. It's affected me a lot of things. Anyway, I'm really glad to be here, really excited to do the class. So thank you for having me.


Not a problem. Yeah. It's worth noting there's a bit of a chicken the egg kind of situation with artistry and ADHD because there are a couple of traits of ADHD that lend themselves well to potential strengths in artistry. So one because I mean, because there tends to be less application of the breaks, let's say, because there's less activity in a couple of key parts of the prefrontal cortex. As I'll get into more detail later, there's kind of more of your emotional directiveness and creative ideas that are going to come up with less of a filter so that can lend itself to creativity at the same time. Because one of the neurotransmitter that are under regulated in ADHD, all else being equal, is Norepinephrine, which is a key neurotransmitter for priority convergence. So, like, if you imagine when you're like adrenalised and like, you know everything's going on, you have to focus like there's an emergency situation or something like that, that's when you've got tons of norepinephrine and you're probably not going to even notice the flowers that you walk past or whatever it is because your focus is like tunnels like that. But people with ADHD compared with the average person, they're going to get less like lower spikes of Norepinephrine.


So then there's less priority convergence to take your focus from being like anything could be it to just the thing at hand. And that actually so it's disadvantageous when we want to deliberately focus on something particularly as mundane and stuff like that. But when it comes to genuine interest and lateral thinking, coming up with like, you know, thinking of all the solutions and then finding the best one, this can actually be a strength for people with ADHD. Yeah. Lending itself to artistry and stuff like that. And many of the people that I see who have ADHD will either have like started companies as there's a threefold likelihood of people with ADHD to start a company than the average person and to lead into some sort of entrepreneurialism or art and stuff like that.


Yeah, and we will get into that throughout the course as well. But it's worth noting that when people with ADHD have actually focused on the content in the first place, so they have actually encoded it, then there won't be a relative problem with the performance of retrieving that information later. But particularly when it comes to like, oh, you've forgotten that detail that seemed like such an obvious thing, or I told you about this before, and that kind of thing. It could be because something else had taken your mind away from it even momentarily, to the point that you just didn't encode it in the first place because that's not where your mind was. So you can figure it out. Like, sometimes on a one on one basis with people with ADHD, I'd have a chat with them about issues that they have with memory, and we can look at particular examples of the types of things that they find difficult to remember to note. Is this an issue with potentially losing focus and not having encoded it? Or is there also a difficulty in memory in general that perhaps has changed over time and stuff like that?


And of course, like dementia, you would expect that there is a degradation over time that would be notable compared with other times. All right, Sheena.


Just walk watching, but I've done lots.


Well, hopefully we'll have something. And a lot of people do have those experiences where not all health professionals that they come across will really understand what ADHD fundamentally is. And while the degree of understanding generally of health professionals of ADHD has gone up significantly in last five years, so it's really heading in the right direction. It's, you know, it's still not really kind of, well, globally understood. And you know, there are a couple of reasons for that, I think. Like when I was studying, doing my Masters and learning about these diagnoses. Look at the name. Attention deficit Hyperactive Disorder. And the idea Deficit. I'm like, Well, I can focus on some things, I can focus when I'm interested, that kind of thing. And the degree of involuntary attention that people have with ADHD, that is to focus on things that you're genuinely interested in that's actually higher all else being equally an average person. It's the voluntary attention, particularly on slow or mundane things, that tends to be very difficult. So it's not so much a deficit in attention, it's the dysregulation, the lack of ability to have that kind of top down or eye decide and then have control over it.


So then looking at that and even looking at the diagnostic criteria, even though it's a good roadmap to diagnosis, looking at the list of those things, it doesn't really make it clear what ADHD is. So I came out of doing my Master's in Clinical Psychology, having an idea of ADHD. And then it was only a couple of years ago so it was about two years ago that I was actually diagnosed as an adult with ADHD. And it was only about six months before that that I really understood what it was. And the reason for that was just getting a bunch of referrals of people with ADHD, because Dr. Keith Johnson, who might be some of your psychiatrist, he is a specialist in the area in Sydney and he would send a lot of referrals my way. So then, because I had that exposure, I was like, Right, do these people really have ADHD? Do I have ADHD? So it's tough, but it is improving. It is improving, certainly. Cat sorry. I could come back to you if you like. Yeah, I'll come back to you. Marissa.


Thanks, Marissa. We'll jump back to you, Cat.


Yeah. Thanks, Kat. And so, Christine, your next up.


That balance. It's a tough role as somebody with ADHD to kind of be the Admin person for your family. If I was that for mine, that wouldn't be the best idea. But well done for cracking in and doing your best on that. Hopefully there'll be some strategies in this that will be helpful.


Cheers. And Paul are your next up on the list.


Yeah. And it's worth noting, I mean, both ADHD and ASD or autism Spectrum disorder, they're both constructs that essentially are built up because we can identify hey, when people have these series of characteristics in general, kind of looking at the average, then they tend to benefit from X, Y and Z when it comes to strategies or benefits or when it comes to ADHD. Also the pharmaceutical side, there is a there is a reasonable amount of overlap conceptually with ASD and ADHD anyway, for that reason that some people actually get a diagnosis of both when one is actually more applicable or they get one instead of the other, that kind of thing. Yes, we will have time for talking about kind of the distinction between them. Or perhaps I can give just a bit of a so. People with ADHD, for example, we have a delayed development of the prefrontal cortex which can relate to bullying and things like that, because we tend to earlier on, not understand social situations as well as somebody else that catches up later. And so that can be one of the overlap areas. As well as that people with ADHD with hyper focus, we tend to get really intently interested in whatever it is that we're genuinely interested in at the time.


And people with ASD can also have that characteristic. The difference is that people with ASD will tend to have consistency with the areas that they find interesting over time where people with ADHD may jump around a bit more.


And then another one is that both people with ADHD and people with ASD can have difficulty in blocking things out, so filtering irrelevant sounds and irrelevant stimuli out of their environment. So like a busy restaurant with lots of people talking, that would tend to be very difficult for both people with ADHD and ASD. But at the same time people with ASD will often have specific sounds or specific stimuli, whether it be the feeling of something, the sound of something, the side of something that is very grating or is very pleasant. And people with ADHD don't necessarily have that kind of specific stimuli. Say, for example, I can think of a child who I was working with who had ASD, and I was distinguishing between those two. And I was asking you about sounds that he would find upsetting, whether it's something specific or whether it's kind of always when there's lots to kind of pull your focus from here to here to here, and he finds it distracting. And it tended to be that it was particular sounds like the kind of low frequency drone of those hand dryers and stuff like that, rather than kind of like lots of overwhelming sound.


And there are other differences as well. But yeah, I just figured that might have been useful for you and also other people if they've had some confusion between those diagrams.


All right. Lisa.


Bit of a clean slate for strategies. And by the way, it doesn't matter whether people are taking the medication for ADHD, whether they've decided not to, or it's not working for them. This group should be helpful either as an adjunct or separately. We'll talk about the nature of the medications, the differences between the intervening ones and how they can be helpful, but most of this will be about regardless of whether you're doing that or not, here's all the other stuff that can be helpful. Rachel.


Yeah, absolutely. Thanks, Rachel. And Sona. Sona, you have to tell me.


Sona.


Yeah, well, other medications being helpful, it sounds like initiation of tasks, consistency and stuff like that. These are all areas that we're going to touch on in this group, so thanks, sonna. Rebecca, you there? Rebecca we will come back. Ashley almost done, guys, till we jump into their slides.


Yeah, the last minute factors, it can be a really helpful one with ADHD. And we even talk about strategies like the Pomodoro technique, which I'll detail in a moment that is basically designed to give you that Adrenalization. Because when we function well at the last minute, when we otherwise were struggling to really get focused early on, this is because when we're Adrenalized, we have access to norepinephrine because it's only one more chemical step, one more step in the chemical process from epinephrine or adrenaline to norepinephrine or noradrenalin.


Absolutely. Thanks, Ashley. Okay, guys, thank you all. We'll jump back and I'll just give a description of what we'll go over today.


Go ahead.


So what's brought you here? Rebecca? Do you feel okay to go, Rebecca, or you'll always get another chance to introduce yourself and everything later if you'd prefer. Okay, we'll come back to you later, Rebecca. There will definitely be more time.


All right, well, thanks, everybody. We'll crack in now. So today we're going to go through this is the basis of just understanding what ADHD is and what it means in the context of a few different areas of experience that we might have. So over the whole course this first week, of course, just understanding what it means to have ADHD. Then next week we'll go into specific strategies like the Pomodoro technique and like setting up accountability and things like that. That we can use to command our attention at times when it's otherwise very difficult to so these are in the moment strategies, regardless of the amount of training or anything like that that you've done around it in order to maximize your ability to focus. Now, in week three, we're going to get into what and how much to commit. So we may have a tendency as people with ADHD for various reasons, to take on extra things. That when we've already got kind of a full plate of things on. Say, if you've got a bunch of things that you've got to do for work or for uni or just in your own kind of life, and something is either more exciting or at that moment, it kind of draws you in.


Or perhaps if you really want to kind of do something for another person, to be generous, that kind of thing, and they have requested your time, then these might be times that it's very tempting to lead away from the things that we've got to do and potentially get into strife later when we realize that we've run out of time. And then we've either got to press things into a smaller amount of it or potentially not even get things done. So we'll talk about how to spot those moments when we're requested to take on something new and then to be able to kind of balance it on the things that are most important that we've already got it on our plate so that we can decide whether to take on that extra thing. Week four and five, they're going to be about goals. So the first one in week four being about setting goals and making sure that they are as conducive to being successful as possible and kind of going through the smart goal idea in detail and reforming. Coming up with a specific goal that everybody can do with kind of like a week as the timeline so that then we can review it in week five and talk about the way that we can be most fair on ourselves and reasonable, so that we can build up goals and multiple goals over time in the most helpful way possible.


In week six and seven, we're going to talk about aspects of how to build up a healthy life, a healthy mind. So these are around, of course, like exercise and diet and, you know, me time and friendship and all that kind of stuff that's important to everybody, but particularly relating it to ADHD and how they might vary a bit when it comes to ADHD in terms of their importance, relatively speaking. And we'll also actually talk about mindfulness meditation and aspects like that that are actually very, very useful when it comes to training your attention switching ability and therefore your ability to stay on task in a very directed way. In week eight, we're going to get into anger and impulsive mistakes and quite a deep dive into really what that is compared with rage and where that can come up and what that tends to kind of overlay. And it can be a bit of a trick through identifying what those tricks are that we kind of feed into ourselves, then we can potentially reduce the amount that we're getting erroneously or unnecessarily angry with things. Then week nine we'll get into emotional resilience in general.


So talking about these kind of through various experiences, then we can learn essentially often when we're young and we kind of don't have the filter to consider other reasons why certain things are happening that we might decide that or figure out that it's inevitable that we're going to say fail if we tried a certain thing. Consistency is a big one when it comes to ADHD or that to do with rejection or to do with having friendships over time and things like that. We'll talk about what types of situations lead to that, the impact that that has on our emotional reaction to things that happen in our daily life and then how we can circumvent that and change it over time. And then in week ten it will just be pretty much no new content apart from just talking about some learning strategies to encode information effectively over time that will apply that day. But then we'll go through and review all the given weeks and today. So we've just gotten to know each other a bit. We'll go through the Pomodoro technique which will detail more next week because that fits into that commanding your attention thing.


But we're going to use it as a tool all throughout this course where we're compressing down the areas of explicit content so that it's basically in a more bite sized chunk that is fast talking, more amenable for people with ADHD to be able to focus on, with breaks in between. And we'll have a break in the moment because we've just focused for a long period of time. Right. Then we'll talk about how ADHD is defined and common experiences and traits for people with ADHD, including the classroom criticism that you might have experienced and the reason for that, the misinterpretations within that, the ability to hyperfocus under the right conditions, drifting off in conversations and how that might get you into trouble and why that might happen. Having your diagnosis undermined, which a few people have mentioned, just taking a while to get the right person who understood what was actually going on. How ADHD brains differ from the average brain in general on a neurochemical basis and on a neuronatomical basis. So like the parts of the brain that relate in some way to ADHD. And then we'll talk about a couple of developmental delay as well as a developmental acceleration that tends all else being equal to exist within ADHD.


So I think now let's let's just have a little break before we jump into this next part. Go and grab a glass of water, do whatever you need to do, I'll do the same, and we'll come back in a couple of minutes.


Anybody have any questions or anything they wanted to say while we're just having a bit of a break?


Okay, so I'll make sure that Cast sends them through after today. We can just send them all as one bulk lot. We normally would have sent them through before today. So it's probably just an oversight that they haven't already come through in terms of the video recordings. And by the way, guys, and it would have said in the consent form, but all of these sessions are recorded. They are posted up on YouTube, but just not in a way that everybody can access it's. Just if you have the specific link and then we send the links out to everybody in the group. So if you've missed it or you want to review it or anything like that, those will be accessible over time. All right, guys, you want to jump back in? We'll get into some of the main content. So to make these sessions grab your attention, hopefully as effectively as possible, we're going to use what's called the Pomodoro technique. Now the Pomodoro technique is basically about, you know, on a really simple way. It's like set up a five, a 25 minutes timer. 25 minutes is the amount of time that they've found in research.


Tends to work for most people. We're not going to time 25 minutes when it comes to this content, but it'll always be less than that. So it's like a bite sized amount that you can actually get revved up and focus into. And I'll generally speak pretty quickly and stuff like that when we're going through the content so that it's not going to be like really slow and boring and stuff like that, let me know. It tends to be and basically through doing that, especially when you do it in your own time, then as long as you've got like, you've got a bunch of signs in the environment that you're using that technique. So let's say you're using an actual egg timer. You've got like the auditory and maybe you've got like the visual presence of an egg timer. If you've got one physically on your desk or something like that, you've got these signs that associate, oh, this is the time that I'm doing Pomodoro technique. This is the time that I'm getting revved up. And for that reason you're able to have some control over adrenalizing, your system. And as I mentioned before, systems adrenalized got access to Norepinephrine, right.


And then norepinephrine. That's to do with priority convergence and tends to be underregulated for people with ADHD. So it allows you to focus. That's why people with ADHD often have that last minute effect and also tend to have a strength when it comes to dealing with emergency situations where other people might get overwhelmed. It's like, right, this and this, there's lots of external stimulation in those moments to keep you pulled in. It's those mundane activities when you don't necessarily have to do it in that moment. Those are the ones that are really tough for people with ADHD in general. Let's see now talking about classical conditioning and how you can have that control or in some way it's slightly indirect over adrenalizing your system. So you think of like the Pavlovian dog who salivates at the sound of a gong. Pavlov was a behavioral psychologist who did experiments or a behavioral researcher. And he was famous for having those dogs who he would always, just before feeding them, he would sound a gong. So then that neutral stimuli, the gong that sound was paired with this stimuli of then eating. And then the dogs would actually then salivate even when they weren't going to eat, when they heard that gong, right?


So just akin to getting Adrenalized, we don't have control over, like I want to get Adrenalized, I'll just do that. And in the same vein, dogs and just like us, because we would celebrate when we are getting ready to eat, we don't have control over that salivatory reflex, but we can gain some control over it by setting up these associations with the event that's actually going to cause the salivation which is eating. Because that's a preparation and part of our digestive system. So it all works. It's all about getting revved up. Let's crack in. The ADHD experiences tension and hyperactivity. So the inattentive component and by the way, I often find that when people are diagnosed as adults with ADHD that there are a couple over representations when it comes to the average person with ADHD. One predominantly inattentive and it's not always the case, but it's likely that people who have predominantly inattentive ADHD, so they don't have so much of the hyperactive acted out component that they're not likely to have been spotted early on when they're in the classroom and stuff like that, not so disruptive and stuff like that. At the same time, if they're high functioning, So people with ADHD span the entire spectrum of intelligence.


This isn't a disability when it comes to less functioning overall. It just means it's a series of strengths and weaknesses in construct. Right, but so people who do well enough to compensate for the weaknesses within ADHD, they're also not going to be spotted when it comes to test scores and stuff like that. You just tend to have this kind of pattern of doing things last minute, potentially not doing the overall long. Assignments that you need to kind of button down on multiple occasions and start early and all that kind of stuff. But if you're able to kind of make up for it in whatever area tends not to be spotted. So we get an overrepresentation in these groups. Now, the inattentive components easily distracted in a classroom because the degree of external stimulation that people with with ADHD require to focus on one thing to the to the exclusion of all else is higher than the average person. So then when something is slow or that you know, there's not a lot of stimulation just in that likely to drift off at the same time, voluntary focus. So placing it on something that's not genuinely interesting, more difficult for people with ADHD to get that spike in Norepinephrine and just focus on that.


So might end up drifting off in the classes when the content isn't particularly interesting, right? And this relates to meetings at work and all that kind of stuff down the track as well. Organization. So there is an aspect of ADHD where and I'll talk about this with the neuroanatomy, but the dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, which is about here, this tends to be smaller with less connections in people with ADHD, all else being equal. It's also an area of the brain, by the way, that can be built up in terms of the resources and size and capacity. But all else being equal, for people with ADHD, this is smaller and with less activity. This is related to executive function, working memory. So like holding things in mind that aren't necessarily relevant to anything else and being able to flip around and figure out what order you should do things in, stuff like that. And attention switching. So like you're drifting off and grabbing that to notice and to pull that back. Like I said, it can be built up. But these are challenges within ADHD and then difficulty listening. So this relates to particularly if somebody speaks slowly or if they're talking about something that isn't novel or complex or generally really pulling you in, then you might even be paying attention to them but also have a song in the back of your head or be thinking of other things at once and all that kind of stuff.


And the reason why it's still ADHD, whether it's just kind of predominantly the inattentive or whether you've got the acted out hyperactivity is because the hyperactivity this comes from these inattentive traits. So you think of like difficulty sitting still, so like tapping and fiddling and stuff like that in the same vein as having a song in the back of your head or thinking of extra things at once, all that kind of stuff. If you've got the hyperactive component, you would tend to kind of to do that with your body and you're doing extra stuff. This can actually be helpful, by the way. There's an element where say, if you're having trouble listening to somebody who is speaking very slowly. There's even evidence to show that if you're doing something with your hands perhaps that isn't socially inappropriate, like maybe, I don't know, tapping or you're tapping your toes or something, can be one that I would teach kids to do back in the day, or even having like a fidget spin onto the table. This can fill up some of that window of external stimulation so that you're able to focus on that more effectively to the exclusion of all else.


Because otherwise if you're getting distracted with something like a thought about something else that pulls you into it, then that can pull you away from the primary topic and then your attention is actually elsewhere versus just kind of filling it up in the background, rushing through tasks. So this is something that most people do inattentive or predominantly inattentive or not, especially when it's a boring or mundane task to you, and especially if you want to get out and do something else that's more exciting and then making rushed decisions. So it can be something impulsive like buying stuff and whatnot. It can be all sorts of things, right? And then the combined presentation of ADHD, this is the most common. It's about 30% of people who have either predominantly inattentive or hyperactive component and then the other 70% have that combined where they've got both aspects. All right, so the experience in the classroom now I've got there like if you just tried as hard as other kids or you're thinking how do they just stay interested all the time? You're so lazy. I do care. This is me trying. And these are things that you might think compared with the things that you might be told by teachers, by parents in your report cards and things like that.


It's one of the kind of the key identifiers. If you have a look at the report card of somebody with ADHD, very often it will be like very bright, don't always live up to their potential or they don't always try as hard as they could and stuff like that. Now that's actually a misinterpretation in many cases. So if you take somebody who is maybe just not the brightest person overall in their class in that particular topic, or somebody with an intellectual disability overall, or in reading and writing or whatever it is, then they will have a level of performance that no matter where it is, relative to the other kids in the class, it's fairly consistent day to day. And it's fairly consistent with the different topics that they're going to focus on. So then a teacher sees that and they're going to give them feedback in accordance to that and they're not going to say, well, you're not trying hard enough, because they can see that they're trying. It's just that's their level of performance. But then you take somebody with ADHD on the days that the content just happens to be genuinely interesting, pulls you in, focus on it, no problem, do better than other days.


And because there's that fluctuation of like, this is what you do when everything's kind of going well, when you're really interested, all that kind of stuff. Other days it's less, it fluctuates depending on the content, depending on the day. And there would tend to be an inconsistency with the amount of homework that you're doing. Sometimes good, sometimes not so good. Then the teacher's interpretation of that would be like, well, their ability is this they're not achieving it all the time. That's probably because they're not actually trying to achieve it. But the difference compared with somebody with ADHD and somebody who's just not actually trying hard is that take the general person and it's still difficult to decide to say, do some math homework when they don't like math, right? It's that decision and to sit down and to put the effort in, that's the challenging part. But once they do that, they're able to focus on that to the exclusion of all else. People with ADHD can want to as much as anybody, but then sit down, delegate. They're like, okay, this is what I'm going to do. But then they drift off, they get distracted, they get pulled into other things, particularly when they're not Adrenalized and it's not genuinely interesting.


And for that reason you can be trying, you can care and still have that fluctuation that's interpreted by the teacher that you're not actually trying or you don't actually care. So it is a misinterpretation, but that leads unfortunately to this sense of like, I'm trying, and yet I'm being told that I'm not trying hard enough. So that's a sense of failure, right? And then it's that sense that you fail at something that you didn't predict. So therefore it may seem over time that it's inevitable that you're going to fail at something when it comes to consistency and stuff like that. And then that can carry with you as one of those things that we can address later in like week nine when we get into the experiences that I talked about that can make something seem inevitable and then relate to the way that we interpret things in our daily life yet. HD Experience Deficit versus Dysregulation I've talked about this a little bit, but when you hear deficit like this is you don't have something, you don't have the ability to focus. It's not true at all for people with ADHD because the degree of focus that we have on things that are genuinely interesting, this is greater all else equal than the average person that you can focus for more time.


More intentively, even to the point of potentially losing time and forgetting about other stuff, deciding not to go to the bathroom, all that kind of stuff. But the focus is there, it's just not there all the time. And it will. So it's a Dysregulation, it's that you can't kind of grab it and place it on whatever you happen to want to focus on. Now you can train this and through modifying lifestyle in a way of, like, more exercise and particular kinds of exercise can be useful for increasing your capacity to focus on things you want to. Medication can be helpful because both the neurotransmitters that I'll talk about in a moment that are under regulated, we have less going around as people with ADHD or else being equal, norepinephrine and dopamine. These are upregulated by both astimulant medications. So dexter, amphetamine and methylphenidate or riddlent that are available in Australia if you're given Concert or Via Advance. These are just slow acting forms of those former aspects of lifestyle. So this could be like diet and stuff like that. Of course, if you're having like, say, really high UI sugary foods, not moderating that with, like, good fats and fiber and protein, then you kind of get lots and lots going on and then you crash because it doesn't take a lot to overwhelm the system in terms of having too much glycogen.


Get an insulin release that stops us from burning any fat at that time. It also converts the carbohydrates that are in our blood, all of them basically into fats, pushes it into our fat cells. So then that's stored for later, but we don't have any. So we get a crash. And at that crash, we're more likely to so this is my camera time out. At that crash, we're more likely to say lose our temper, get frustrated with things, lose our focus on stuff. So then through having that kind of fluctuation over the course of the day, it's not ideal. If we change that, then we can increase our capacity too. All right, have a chill again, we got just a little section. After this, we'll just have like one or two minutes to kind of gather yourself. I know I just talked pretty fast and threw a lot at you while we're just having a little bit of a chill. Does anybody have any questions? Anything they wanted to say? Yeah, Rachel.


Yeah. So the dorsilateral prefundral cortex. So, like, the prefrontal cortex is from about our temple forward and has a whole lot of subcortical regions there called the dorsal lateral. Prefrontal cortex just neuro anatomically, it's just dorsal, as in dorsal fin up the lateral, as in the outside rather than medial, which is inside. And then the prefrontal cortex. So it's just like it's a couple of location terms and these relate, if you're interested, to all aspects of locating things in the brain. But that area of the brain just happens to be takes a lot of resources to run it. And it's related to self control, attention switching, executive function and working memory.


Oh, absolutely. So there's good research to show that through engaging in aspects of self control. So delaying gratification, doing things that you don't feel like doing, that are hard. Right. And also through doing things that are actively practicing attention switching like mindfulness meditation, which we'll get into in that week. These all train your ability for self control. The model for self control, by the way, is called the strength model because just as if you don't go and lift up heavy things, then your muscles aren't going to be capable of that because it's like use it or lose it resource delegation. But if you then go and do that on a regular basis, then your system is going to be like, oh crap, I can barely do that, I better give some more resources to our my strength system. Same thing when it comes to the selfcontrol system. So you can build that up in that way. And we know from then studying after people have built up their selfcontrol using these methods, that it does actually build up, that it increases the size of the dorsalidal prefrontal cortex and the amount of connections within.


But yes, yeah, definitely. I mean locally, like all all of the aspects of ADHD can be worked out in some way using the techniques that we'll talk about in this group.


No worries.


A lot of people will either see an ADHD coach or a psychologist who works within the area. A lot of psychologists like myself will do some ADHD coaching as well. Basically, the goal of these ten sessions is to just tell you all the kind of the strategies that you can use and apply over time. There will be times when things are going awesome and there'll be times when they're not so much and you got to build it back up. And this is just a natural process of life, but at least it kind of gives you those foundations and hopefully some kind of self compassion as well through seeing that lovely, successful people in their own right also have ADHD and share many of these traits with you. And it doesn't mean this terrible thing that you might have in your mind.


Yeah. So it's not to have a goal in every single one of these areas as we go. It's just to have the understanding, at least part understanding, through going through this group and then knowing that you've got the reference to look it up later, so that when you do have the capacity, you do have the time that you'll know what to do when you want to work at X, Y or Z.


All right, guys, last session of Information, I think, today. Start your pomodoro timers, so to speak. All right, so the experience when it comes to conversations might have heard, like, are you even paying attention? Or people getting annoyed with you because they feel like you're not interested in what they're saying or you're not taking it seriously and things like that. Tapping, fiddling, shuffling, coming up with ideas for other things, why people are talking, not realizing you've been passionately explaining something you love for ages. This relates a bit to hyper focus, like when you're talking, especially if somebody happens to ask about something that you're really keen on or you've been really into the last week, or whatever it is, talk to the point that you're like, wait, hold on, they've been drooling for the last ten minutes. I should probably stop or let them talk or something. Now, I've got there as like a bit of a meme, like what your teachers no doubt thought, just that your head might be in the clouds and stuff like that. And then what your friends may think is that some people may think that you're bored or that they're not interesting and stuff like that.


But what we think is we've got a million ideas, and that's only one. Whether it's a classroom or conversations and stuff like that, it's fulfilling that extra requirement for stimulation, whether it be through tapping, doing something physical or having other ideas or a song or whatever it is in the back of your head. But that can unfortunately pull you completely into it in some occasions. And even when it doesn't, we can get into trouble socially when people are talking about something that's really important to them and they feel undervalued. Okay, so we all watch this video now, but when you have these slides, this is a how to ADHD video. It just kind of reinforces the stuff that I was talking about emotional sorry, a moment ago. So she talks about emotional volume and rejection tolerance. So people with ADHD, because there's less of the brakes being applied in a sense, than that kind of emotional drive that's underneath it usually has more of a holding back for the average person. People with ADHD are going to express that more quickly and more fragrantly than the average person. So then the emotional volume in terms of how you feel, whether it's be happiness or sadness or anger or anything like that, tends to be more quickly and more significantly experienced.


She talks also about rejection tolerance and this through not as a kind of characteristic trait of ADHD, but people with ADHD are likely and will get to why they might be likely to experience the sense of rejection early on in life in particular that then relates to that rejection tolerance. Because if you've had repetitive experiences of, like, bullying or criticism about fundamental traits that you can't change and stuff like that, then this can lead to the idea that either you've got to compensate in some way through doing really well in something or people pleasing, like doing things for other people, or that you're just fundamentally going to be left out or left by people ultimately. And you've got to somehow try to work against that. That can lead to rejection. Sensitivity. Like difficulty in handling ambiguous things that can be rejection. Even. Like, you imagine you send a text message to somebody, they don't respond right away, or it says seen and they don't respond. And you're like, that's a sign that it could be rejection, that they've seen it. And they're like, oh, them. They don't actually want to respond. But it also could be that they saw it and they're busy, that they saw it end or like that they didn't even realize that it came up, that their phone just kind of said something like that.


There are a whole bunch of other reasons that have nothing to do with rejection, but then rejection is an option. But if you've got that sense that it's inevitable that you're going to be rejected because of prior experiences, then you're going to see that on an emotional level as a greater sense of threat than you otherwise would. Now the public perception, like we all have a bit of ADHD or back in my day we are disciplined, now we have ADHD. No one likes doing chores, we just do them anyway. And this is where the difference is. As I was explaining before, that the hard thing for the average person and it's still a challenge if you really don't want to do something, is to decide and to dedicate time and effort to doing that thing that you don't necessarily want to do. People with ADHD can do that though and still find that they flounder, that they get distracted and stuff like that. And in the same vein making that decision and kind of being like yes, I'm definitely going to do that, to see the importance in it at the time. This is harder for people with ADHD because there's less norepinephrine to be like yes, that's the decision I made consolidated nothing else I'll stop doing.


I'll get out of bed or I'll stop browsing my phone or watching Netflix or something and then go and do the thing that is important and I can see is important, but I may not think of in the moment as being critical enough to pull me into it and Adrenalize me. And in the same vein, because Dopamine, which is related to reward, is also under regulated for people with ADHD, then that felt sense of, like, basically dopamine works on expectations. So whether it be something that you've done or achieved or something that happens in the environment, if it's better than expected, then you get a spike in Dopamine. If it's worse than expected, you get a suppression in dopamine. And then when it's under regulated, so you got less of it going around, the suppression is greater, which is related to the intrinsic feeling of that sucked, right? And the spike is not as big, which is related to the feeling of, yes, I've nailed that. That was great, and related to productivity. If you have you think of somebody who like, loves being productive, they love getting all their admin stuff done and everything like that.


They got like an active dopamine system. They're like, yes, I've nailed that, I've nailed that, I've nailed that. Compared with somebody with ADHD can be like, okay, I've done that, right? I've done that. There's less of a spike. And you might even have noticed for the people who do take either Dexter amphetamine or riddlen or methamphetate, that when you take that, there's more of a sense that you're pleased with the successes that you've had and therefore you're spurred on to do the next and the next and the next. There's less aversion or some balance to the aversiveness that you may have of doing the boring task. All righty, guys, and that is all the content for today. Of course, we spend much of the time just like, getting to know each other and everything. Let me just make sure. Okay, I do have a little section. It is 07:00 if anybody needs to go. Lovely to meet you. And you will have these recordings if you can stick around. I think it will only take me like five more minutes just to crack through these last few sides. All right, so ADHD in the brain, and I mentioned much of this so Norepinephrine related to decision consolidation and how it seems impossible to start things you probably kind of should do.


This is the underregulation of Norepinephrine dopamine the reward system and why it's really hard to keep doing things that aren't fun. As I was just mentioning, general activity and the drive for stimulation. So that requirement for extra stimulation and then thinking of extra things at once and potentially getting distracted. And so the dorsalateral prefrontal cortex is an area that's smaller, less activity, less connections. Also the ACC or the interior single at cortex, another area of the prefrontal cortex. Now, this is to do with slowing down so that you can make a different decision. Dorsalad or prefrontal cortex is about reframing and deciding, like inhibit one thing, do something else. Combined with the interior signal cortex, you've got that double whammy of being able to slow down and do the thing that you effectively want to do. That area of the brain is also something you can build up in the same vein as a dorcillator prefinal cortex and medication. As I mentioned, both the stimulant medications upregulate both Dopamine and norepinephrine. There are other non stimulant medications that you can take. So, like strategic, for example, something that's covered by the PBS in Australia. And this is a it is a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor.


So it upregulates norepinephrine. And there are a couple of other ones that are less common to take, but they're always going to act in some way on one or both of those neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine. Social developmental Delay so people with ADHD, we tend to have a delay in time in development of developing our prefrontal cortex, which is related to like, understanding the overall kind of abstract notion of socializing and all that kind of stuff. This can be related to some of the bullying and stuff like that that you may have earlier in life. This does catch up by the time you reach adulthood in that overall prefrontal cortical activity. But that can relate to some difficulties earlier on the motor cortex, though, which, by the way, is a slice about here, basically through the brain, the motor cortex, which controls what our muscles in our body do in our skeletal system. This tends to develop a little faster for people with ADHD oils being equal. Let's see. Yes, now we have actually gotten through all the material. So all I'd say is, before next session, if there's somebody in your life who you can choose, explain ADHD to a friend or a loved one who may not understand it completely, it might be your parents, because they come from a different generation and don't really believe that ADHD exists.


Or maybe they think that it exists, but their notion of it is completely different than what they think is going on for you, so they doubt it or something like that. Just pick somebody in your life and use something from today. Hopefully there is something new that you can utilize to explain it better to them. All right, does anybody have any questions, anything they wanted to say before we finish up today? Hi, Alex and everyone. Sorry I'm late. I should probably introduce myself to everyone.


What was the name of the pharmaceutical you just mentioned? So I talked about Dexter and as in, like, what are the medications that are taken? Is that what you mean? You just mentioned one right at the end. Stretcher. How do you spell that? Sstratera. And I think that's a brand I can't remember the actual drug name of it, but common enough one if you're seeing a psychiatrist who specializes in ADHD, they'll certainly know all about it. People use that sometimes if the stimulant medications either mess with their sleep or don't really work very well for them and stuff like that. The first line and more effective for the average person with ADHD is still the stimulant medications. If you're interested in the difference between Dexter amphetamine and Ritalin, by the way, anybody the difference when it comes to what they up regulate. So they both work on Norepinephrine and Dopamine. Dexter amphetamine, relatively speaking, focuses a bit more on dopamine. So there's a bit more of that kind of enhanced effectiveness when it comes to reward. And there's research to show that on average, adults tend to do better with Dextro amphetamine, kids tend to do better with Ritalin.


But I know that wasn't all your question, but did that answer what you were mainly interested in there, Josh? Yeah, I was just trying to get the name. Everything else was fantastic. Additional knowledge. Thank you. Not a problem, Alexander.


Because the variation just individually person to person between the way that one person is going to take riddlen versus Dex and another is greater than the difference between the two in general. And so, like when I was saying that it tends to be that Dex works better for adults. That's an average thing. And there are plenty of adults who have tried both. I've tried both, but plenty of adults who have tried both and prefer Ritalin as well. Usually a psychiatrist will have kind of like one that they go to first in the same vein. Like, when I saw a psychiatrist initially, I had already researched it and I'd read the meta analysis. It was related to seeing, like, what works better? And I said, okay, based on this, I'd like to try Dex first. And he was fine with it, but everybody's got their different ways of interacting with them. Does that answer your question?


No worries. All right, well, thanks a lot, guys.


I get that question a bit. Other people here might actually, but I haven't found one book that really kind of overall highlights all the different elements. I've read several different ones and kind. Of just picked them to pieces in terms of what's most beneficial. Does anybody else have a suggestion, perhaps? I think a couple of people mentioned books that they've read. Anyone want to suggest one to Rebecca?


Yeah, talking about videos. And somebody else mentioned the how to ADHD channel on YouTube called how to ADHD. I really liked that one. And when I was kind of learning about it, fundamentally, just when I first kind of thought, like, Do I have that? Then I found those really helpful. Just like she had done a lot of research, talk to professionals, but also just kind of talked about her subjective experience, which was useful to me. All right, guys, well, look forward to next week getting to know you all a bit better and having more of a chat. And by the way, Josh, everybody kind of got a chance to properly introduce themselves at the start of today, so remind me next week if I don't remember. And we'll give you a bit of time to mention kind of how you ended up coming to this group.
me
Rolling Stone. How's everybody going with the extension of their goals or like if there are kind of more parts that they wanted to kind of keep on building to. It still in the peripheral on the agenda.


So you're working on your tax? That's right, yeah.


Yeah, it's really easy to like because Dopamine is under regulated for people with ADHD and this definitely applies to me and applies to plenty of people with ADHD that you can kind of get stuff done and just be like, okay, finally, I don't have to focus on that. But you're not really getting as much intrinsic reward. One way to kind of ramp that up, I guess, is to focus on think of how many times it was just in the back of your head that kind of dragged you down and stuff and just remembering that, like, you don't have to ever think about that one again.


You can yeah. Well, I'm glad to hear that it did come up at another time and stuff like that. It can be a really good technique to just outside of this course or anything to do with structured goal setting to think through when is the time that I'm actually going to have to do this? And what else was I thinking that I might do on that day just to kind of go through those things? Because you can easily overbook yourself because you kind of have this vague idea that's like, oh, well, I don't know, clean the fridge on the weekend, whatever it is. But you also like, somebody says, oh, do you want to come and do this on the weekend? Yeah, I'm free. I don't have any particular plans. Sweet. But if, you know, it's like, this is the time that I'm doing it, I can change that around if something really value comes up, but I have to find another time for it if I do that.


I see what you'd be talking about there. Because attention deficit isn't actually accurate. Right? You can't attend to anything. It's that it's more difficult to attend to things that don't have a whole lot of stimulation or novelty and don't pull you in, but things that do pull you in. So that kind of idea of involuntary attention where something is genuinely interesting, that actually we have a greater deal of attention on it for a longer period of time, which is where you get hyper focus from. So it's really just like pick your circumstances. Some people with ADHD will attend more and some less, so it's not deficit like. I agree with that premise. I guess in general, I'm like every time a new DSM, like DSM stands for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual is the main kind of American mental health kind of diagnosis book like that, as well as the ICD Ten, which is the equivalent of that in Europe. But they pretty much change the name of things every time they come out with a new addition, which is fine, but most of the time not that well thought out. Like, at least if they're doing it, like this is just me, at least if they're doing it for the sake of like, accuracy, like you're talking about, then there's something there.


Like often times they will just they will change the word of something just because it developed a negative connotation. But the negative connotation was developed because of its use. So, like, the word, the words moron and idiot, for example, were prior. So this is going back. A few additions were prior actual diagnostic terms. Right. And so naturally, like, they developed the connotations over time and people used it in derogatory fashion, so they're like, right, so we've got to change this. So then it's like intellectual disability this or that. If they make it longer and less buzzwordy and stuff like that, then people are less likely to use it. But I mean, you're just kind of like moving the target, trying to make language stop being language.


If you want people to be nicer, maybe you should address the reason they're not being nice. Not like try to remove the words that they can use.


The only way that I differ to your statement there is the sometimes part that are only full short. Sometimes.


Yeah. So like, spastic is like it's still a term that's used not as a full diagnosis but as a symptom. So muscle spasticity, which is the involuntary contractions of the muscles that cause problems with controlled movement. Right. So if somebody has like, spasticity, then that can be a jerking sensation or it can be that they're really tight and they're not fully relaxing. So that's still something that's talked about in that sense, but they used to talk about it in more diagnostic terms, whereas now they would use something different to refer to the same thing just because people started using it as a slur. Which is fine, except it just doesn't solve any problems, I don't think. Maybe it's my synergism. See? What time are we at now?


I agree. And I actually think the marketing pi angle, if that's about developing empathy, understanding all that kind of stuff, that cancels it out. Like, I think that that cancel out on a more foundational basis where people don't like they're not like wanting to hurt somebody's feelings and stopping themselves because they might get canceled or this or that, or the word doesn't exist anymore, then they actually don't want to, which I think is better for society anyway. So, guys, this week is on healthy Life, healthy Mind. So it'll be this week and next week that we talk about a few different kind of foundational aspects of how you can increase your baseline performance by addressing things like diet, sleep, exercise, all that kind of stuff. So I'll be talking about these things that most of which are important for everyone, but all of these have particular applications in ADHD and through understanding that, which I'll explain here, be able to more directly apply it to what's best for you. So we'll go through today, we'll go through the exercise, diet, spending time in nature. There's a bit of research around that with ADHD that can be very effective for clearing your head and allowing that clear thinking, which, by the way, does happen for the average person as well, but it occurs more highly for people with ADHD.


And we'll talk about sleep as well today, which I know is pretty important for well, it's always very important, but it tends to be a real interest area for people with ADHD, because a lot of people with ADHD struggle with sleep. And this is the kind of by the way, so people with ADHD can struggle with sleep in the same I know, I'll talk about it a bit later. In the same way as most people would develop an insomnia related to anxiety, either about the next day or about having a very bad sleep resulting in, you know, a bad next day, that kind of thing. This tends to be the driver, and we can have that too. But what most people don't experience, and people with ADHD often do, is that sense of like you're not really thinking about anything that's stirring you up or anything like that. Your brain is just like going you're sitting there just like, why am I wide awake at 03:00 a.m. There's nothing that I'm really thinking about for which I need to be wide awake. I don't even feel like getting up and doing stuff, but I just am.


And this is something that people with ADHD experience, where, you know, it's kind of unique to us. Not that I'm saying that nobody ever has had that outside of ADHD. Maybe they have, but it's certainly been researched and observed as something that people with ADHD have. Which is why it's common, by the way, and some of you may already be taking Melatonin, but it's common that because it kind of gets exacerbated the issues with sleep, potentially with taking stimulants like Dextroenthetamine and Ritalin, that it is pretty common that people with ADHD would take Melatonin either nightly or when they need it. And that's just something that they talk to their psychiatrist about. That's just an observation. All right, so the exercise part so of course it's important for everyone for health and longevity, immune function, happiness, energy, strength, looking good exercise triggers your system to work optimally. So of course, you know that feeling of lethargy that's going to be largely combated by this, the mood related to motivation and the feeling that you can take things on and succeed at them. This goes up when you're doing things like exercise and because most people have in mind that exercise is good for them and it's something that they don't always do as much as they would like to.


The narrative that basically forms how happy you feel and how good you feel about how you're going at that time in your life changes when it's like well, you imagine an end of the week where you've gone out and exercised a bit and you're looking back on that and be like yeah, I feel good about myself. Even regardless of the feelgood aspects of actually having done the exercise, you feel happy that you've done that because it's something that you don't always do and you know, it's good for you versus a day where you like, didn't really get out of the house much and haven't done much exercise. It's that narrative based on the value of wanting to do exercise and feeling good about yourself when you have and not so good about yourself when you haven't. This is the same thing that relates to the selfesteem angle around procrastination and stuff like that, which is certainly a very common thing for people with ADHD. So exercise also upregulates all the processes involved in building serotonin. Norepinephrine and dopamine So Norepinephrine and Dopamine, as I've mentioned, these are the two neurotransmitter that are under regulated for people with ADHD.


So Norepinephrine relating to the focus decision consolidation, biggest spike of that means that you can more directly get into one task to the exclusion of all else and not get distracted. And dopamine, of course, related to reward pleasure and stuff like that. And you know, that kind of feel good sense of achievement that you get when you have nailed something down. So because it up regulates these if you do about half an hour and they've actually studied when people do 30 minutes of high intensity cardio exercise with ADHD for about 2 hours, after that, dopamine and Norepinephrine are upregulated enough that they're the same as the average person on average. So during that window, that's when you might be able to get stuff done, perhaps even without your medication, that kind of thing, but can be used in conjunction, of course. Right. So exercising in the morning, or if you find that you're really kind of procrastinating and stuff like that, giving yourself a chance to get out, go for a quick jog or whatever it is that works for you. Exercise being a part of the day of people with ADHD is a good thing and the amount of exercise that's required to get the ideal maximum benefit from it for people with ADHD is higher than the average person, it can be more useful for more things.


And it also relates to sleep, right? Everybody knows that when they've been tuck it out during the day. Like if you go for a hike, sleeping in a pretty uncomfortable place if you're camping out but you probably go to sleep, no problem. But then if you've been studying all day, staring at a computer or something like that, you're not physically tired, which is that kind of contradiction with you. I'm really kind of mentally tired, I'm mentally exhausted. I've done my dash with the resources that I have for self control today but I'm so physically wired that I can't sleep anyway. So just a note relates to lots of different things.


So that's not like a recommendation for the amount of sleep, sorry, the amount of exercise that you get on a day. It's just that they've studied like that's, the amount that they chose and then they could see there's a meaningful over the next 2 hours upper regulation of those neurotransmitter. So you can focus and feel the reward and stuff like that better. But I guess you'd just be thinking the more the merrier. That's not causing you problems in any way for various reasons people might have sensitivities with their joints or something like that or they find that if they're exercising too much, like overtraining is a possible thing and stuff like that. But if you're nowhere near that point the more the merrier. And like most of us in this kind of sedentary, especially like locked down society where we're not going to be harmed by doing a bit more. So it's just a matter then of finding out like how do you do it? And that's what the next slide is about. It's like find the things that just happen to include exercise that are fun and good in and of themselves. If it's social, if you've got accountability, imagine you're going with a friend versus not going with a friend.


Then you've got the accountability aspect making you more likely to do it and not miss a day. And then when you actually do get there, you have a better time, you get to know the person better. It becomes a regular thing so that there's an extra driver that has nothing to do with the exercise that brings you in over and over again because it feels good to go and hang out with your friend and it destresses and stuff like that. And you might think of hobbies that you've done in the past, or you might not have even called them hobbies, but things that you've done in the past that just happened to be active, if you can find those things. Because so many people these days have in mind that exercise is going to a gym. And, like, it's kind of like this tiny kind of funneled in view of, like, stand on a treadmill after being in traffic for half an hour to get there inside a gym instead of going for, like people think. That exercise is a drag. But then most people have experiences of actually doing things that they really enjoy that happen to be exercise, that they love and absolutely weren't a choreo drag.


And the more you enjoy it, the more you'll go back and the longer that you will spend doing it. Does anybody have an example that applies to them? Whether it's a hobby they've done in the past, anything that just happens to be active but is fun enough that they don't really think about it as exercise. But it just is.


Right? Not just dancing, but Scottish kind of.


Is that something you go to a place and do on a regular basis with people?


Yeah, it's a great one if you can pick a hobby. That's me in the picture of rock climbing, it's like you do something that just happens to be, like, draws your focus in. Like you go outdoor. If I'd go outdoor climbing with people, we think we've been there for like half an hour and it's been like three, 4 hours. Because you just like you're chatting or you're up halfway up a cliff and all that kind of stuff. The one that I'd mentioned for this in particular is if you see those VR goggles in the background, putting that on and playing some beat saber, which is basically like you think of rhythm games, like Guitar Hero. You've ever kind of heard of that? This is that. But in virtual reality, you're holding lightsabers with both hands and you've got to slash these blocks in a particular direction and like dark and dodge and everything like that. It's really, really fun. And within five minutes I will be absolutely covenant sweat. So it's an actual workout. Who else has got an example that kind of that applies to them? That just something fun that they can do.


Yeah, 100% nice. Did you fall over much when you were learning?


That it's not raining so much, I have to admit. I actually bought myself some inline skates when doing lockdown and I haven't used them yet.


I guess that's a tough one. Potentially, though, I couldn't think of anyone that I know who also robble blades that I could ask to meet up with. Did you use a meetup group or just friends?


One of the barriers for me was just that I could do it without my puppy life. But I kind of feel like any time that I'm going out to do something like that, I want to take him with me, live in an apartment. So that's the freaking part.


Yeah, that sounds good. One more example that someone has of just something that people might not even think of but might help other people.


Yeah. So what's your role in that? Like you're standing up helping?


Yeah. So you do that last one with the ones who have marked up and you wanted to get usually the ones.


Yeah. Come. I just want to teach you this trick. I guess that would apply to other people in that if there's a flexibility or there are opportunities in work where you can do something that just happens to be active and maybe just like lean toward doing it if you've got the chance. Usually it's like one person in the office who might be like, oh, yeah, I'll get people the coffees, but that's a walk that otherwise you might have been sitting at your desk or there are probably cooler examples, but it really just depends on your workplace, I guess. All right.


It'S not enough to focus on.


Realized that, oh, sorry, you should try that zombie run app. But I mentioned a couple I do.


It's pretty good. Like, if you suspend belief and convince yourself for a moment that it's true, then it's like, okay, got it.


Was that kind of like running with the bulls, but you've got actors in zombies.


Nice.


Oh, yeah. There's just stuff that you can't do in Australia.


Well, I mean, at least you think of Spain with the actual running of the bulls and people die most of the time they do that, right. Oh, gosh. I guess they're just like, well, personal responsibility should have ran faster. I don't quite say that in Australia in any state. Alright. Pomodoro set number two diet considerations. So, I mean, the whole idea here is just to maintain more consistent energy. Because if we have these kind of these crashes where, like, you get a peak in energy, but particularly with high GI carbohydrates, as in, like, sugars and even like any kind of cereals or breads or just grain products in general, even corn, which is a grain, not a vegetable. These things are very high in glycemic index, which is a measure in general of how fast it will go into your bloodstream after you've eaten it. And the amount that our body can handle in our bloodstream when it comes to sugar is about two teaspoons of sugar. We can store up to ten teaspoons or so, and it depends on the size of the person and how big their muscles are in their muscles. And we store another few teaspoons in the liver.


But unless you've just run a marathon, your stores and your muscles aren't going to be completely empty and the stores in your liver aren't going to be completely empty unless you have been fasting or something like that for a long time. So basically, if you eat like a whole bowl of cereal, that would generally be enough to get too much sugar into your system at the same time, so that your body has to release insulin, which is a global response. So, like, it will then exchange all of the glucose that is in your bloodstream for fat. So it changes it in added post tissue, pushes into your fat cells. And at that moment, because it's that global response that you can't just like, be like, oh, well, I'm 10% too high, so I will convert 10% of it. And then you feel like you've got plenty of energy after that. It doesn't do that. As soon as that happens, you have none. So then you feel a crash and that's that sugar crash, where then you want to go and eat some more sugar. And so there's a couple of other things eating sugar in these high glycemic indexings do.


So they increase the secretion, as in, like the amount that you're getting rid of the vitamins and minerals that are necessary to break down the carbohydrates. So it's got that added response. And so, like, people will often they'll have one, they crash and then they go off. They're like, well, I kind of feel hungry, my blood sugar is low, I'll go and have something else to eat. And if it's the same kind of stuff, same thing, they're just going through these starvation cycles, which also increases Cortisol in the body. It increases the degree of stress that the body is. The body is basically getting a generalized model of how stressful the situation is in terms of how much it has to conserve resources, how difficult it is in your living situation. And those starvation cycles are telling your body that it's quite a chaotic environment. So then increasing cortisol decrease. In testosterone for guys, decrease in serotonin, that kind of thing, which these kind of physiological indicators that correspond to like feeling that everything is all good, you don't have to worry about things versus you do. So all that happens. And when we of course get a starvation crash that's the point where we don't have a lot of resources available, particularly for our brain.


Our brain cannot use fat. Most people know the macronutrients of protein, carbohydrates and fat. But proteins basically only used for energy if you're running a marathon or you're like starving because that's actually it's useful to store that in the muscles and proteins. Main reason for being there in our body is as a catalyst for different chemical reactions, right? So we want it for that, not for its energy use primarily because it uses tons of oxygen in order to convert that into energy anyway, which means lots and lots of breathing. And fat uses more oxygen for the energy that it produces than carbohydrates which is why we tend to default to carbohydrates when we're doing really high intensity stuff. But when we're doing low intensity stuff sitting around and working and stuff like that, then we can burn fat, but only when we don't have insulin in our system. If we spike our blood sugar to the point that our body has to produce insulin when we have the available insulin in our bloodstream we cannot burn fat for energy at that time. So then can't burn fat, can't burn carbs because that's all being pushed into your fat cells and turned into fat.


Push into your fat cells, you're not going to have very much energy to think clearly. Right. And as I think I mentioned in a prior session that the area of the brain or the areas of the brain that are related to self control, impulse regulation dorsalita prefrontal cortex and the interior cingulate cortex these are as everything in the prefrontal cortex is. They are very expensive areas and if they don't get enough resources that don't function, we don't die. But if the medial parts of our brain, our autonomic nervous system and stuff like that if they were to stop, then we do because they keep everything going. So when we don't have a lot of resources, that's the part that's going to get less soonest. Right? So then that selfcontrol aspect, like, all of the issues that we associate with, like temper, irritability, ability of focus, put your focus on something, all of these are selfcontrol related. And we're going to be worse at them at those times when we don't have access to the energy, because it's going to starve that area first, because it's not going to be an issue. It's probably maybe a longer explanation that we needed, but hopefully it's interesting.


So the way to moderate that if you include protein and or fiber into a meal so fiber, I mean, of course you're getting green leafy vegetables and stuff like that. Fiber is just a carbohydrate that cannot be broken down by our body because we don't have the enzymes, the most common of which is cellulose, right, which is in all your green leafy vegetables and stuff like that. Is that kind of fibery like woody kind of feel, right? Like trees are made from cellulose primarily, but because we can't break it down, it goes through with the rest of it. So it's good for digestion, good for your gut biodor as well. But it also it slows down the absorption of carbohydrates. Protein also slows down the absorption of carbohydrates. So then you'll get a much more kind of leveled off response. You're less likely to have that kind of crash due to high sugar without anything else in it. And of course, just limiting high GI things. And people might have a bit of a misnomer about that because when you look at the advertising serials, you see like, oh, this is low GI. It's like, well, compared with what?


So when you look at low GI cereals, they tend to have a GI like glycemic index from about 55 to 65. Extremely high table sugar is about like 65 to 70, depending on how refined it is. It's almost like eating pure sugar and even when you compare it to fruit. So bananas, they differ a lot based on how right they are, but like 35 to 45. So that's all dramatically lower than even the lower line from these low giles, including breads and all that kind of stuff. Apples, about 35. Basically everything that like grapes, everything that you can think of fruit wise, it's all going to be dramatically lower. So if you think of like, yeah, fruit tastes sweet, but the rate at which it's going to be absorbed as sugar is slower than basically all grain products. So worth kind of keeping that in mind. Plus, I mean, all fruit to some degree will have some fiber in it, which can moderate that other response as well. Usually some vitamins and minerals in it as well, which, I mean, it's not that you have no vitamins and minerals in these grain products, but it's not a nutrient dense food when you're just eating like the grains on their own.


They're just a filler. Yeah. So there's also been studies on low carb diets in general for people with ADHD. They've even gone to like I'm never going to be an advocate when it comes to full on crash diets. Like actually the keto diet, which is like a very, very small amount of carbohydrates. Well, like, normally the recommendation is 60% carbohydrates, 30% fat, 10% protein. They're talking about, I think, taking the carbohydrates from 60% down to, I don't know, somebody else might know, but somewhere between ten and 30. I know that's a big range, but it's very low regardless, right? So the adaptation to that, I think that a lot of people would feel very good with it. It wouldn't be necessary to a lot of people to get much of the benefits, but there would still be an adjustment. Like your system. If your system is primarily used to getting carbohydrates to feel full and using those primarily, you have to kind of retrain it to use fat primarily as your energy source, so you'll feel hungry for a bit until your body kind of codons onto its new diet. But it does get used to when you do feel full without the carbs, when you cut them down.


But my idea is just to take the utility from the keto diet and to think, well, if we reduce that a bit, if we tend to just have more of the tasty good stuff as far as I'm concerned. Like, think of breakfast, for example. Like a fried like a cooked breakfast, having one piece of toast instead of two, throwing some nuts on the side, maybe having a bit more meat in there, an extra egg to counterbalance what you lose from the carbs. That would be in line with this. And as far as I'm concerned, it's like way tastier. So I think that, like, it is possible to do it in that way. When people go into these crash diets, apart from the kind of, you know, it does put a bit of pressure on the body and stuff like that when they're going into them. But the main reason why I'm not an advocate for them is because people don't keep them going for very long. If it's not like a lifestyle that makes sense for you long term, then I wouldn't engage in that. I'd make changes that, you know, are practical and tasty enough that you want to keep on doing it.


So if you're just leaning toward, how do I get a bit more protein, some good fats and stuff like that, you can do that in a really tasty way without necessarily taking a whole lot of time in the kitchen or anything like that. When I say good fats, by the way, the main thing that I'm referring to is just not these polyunsaturated or saturated fats that have been made saturated. So I know that there's older research which recommends to people not to have any kind of saturated fat, and that includes basically anything that is solid at room temperature. So you think like, butter, meat, fat and all that kind of stuff. If it's solid at room temperature, pretty certain it's a saturated fat. So, like, saturated is it actually refers to the chemistry where it's like it is saturated with hydrogen because essentially it's a long strain of carbon with hydrogens on most of those ends, right? And then it's like, well, if it's fully saturated, that's what they're referring to here. And a saturated lipid or fat is more stable in its built form as a solid, so it will do that at a lower temperature.


So at room temperature, it'll be a solid. Whereas you think of, like, vegetable oil, olive oil, stuff like that. These are unsaturated fats and they're liquid at room temperature. But they've actually found out in research now that fats that are saturated naturally, so, like, the butter and the meat and, like, coconut oil is a good example as well. So these are all naturally saturated fats. They don't actually have health problems like the artificially made saturated fats. So, like Margarine, that was originally made in Germany during the war, and it's just hydrogenized. So, like, made saturated vegetable oil or canola oil or something like that. So they take an oil which is unsaturated naturally, and then they heat it and they can use other chemical processes to saturate that. And that's really quite unhealthy. And, yeah, when you think about, like, you know, the foods that have these not just like high fructose corn syrup, which is a path one related to glycemic index and addiction and stuff like that, addiction to food. But when they have these kind of, like, fats that have a name that you kind of say, it's probably one of these artificially made Polyard saturated fats that have an advantage that at the temperature that you're likely to eat the food, it has a desirable texture or something like that, but it ain't healthy.


Yeah, I'll cover that area off. Now here, I just wanted to say, does anybody have any questions or anything like that on diet? And I know that I didn't talk about how do you actually kind of make yourself stick to a diet that much. But the main thing, I guess, is just like, take it slow, make it delicious. Does anybody have any questions, though? Oh, good. Okay?


Can you say that last on what? Sorry.


Intermittent fasting, okay. Yeah, so there's good evidence saying that it's not a health issue whatsoever to do intermittent fasting, even longer term fasts, up to at least three days, as long as people are replacing just a couple of salts. The main reason why you need to replace salts when you do the longer term fast, by the way, is that we excrete them anyway over time. And those salts, as in, like, not just sodium chloride, but like, magnesium chloride, potassium, that kind of thing, these are required for water retention in our body, so we dehydrate unless we replace those. And you don't need to do that when it's just a day, by the way. Intermittent fasting has been shown to improve insulin sensitivity, which is a good thing. So when our body is constantly releasing insulin, then it really wears out our pancreas, like our ability to produce it. And that's primarily what leads to type two diabetes. When you get that resistance back up by fasting and things like that, you're giving that system a break. So there's advantages in terms of long term health, it is not necessary to eat three meals a day.


Total myth didn't come from anything substantive. Eating one meal a day, absolutely no problem, as long as you're getting a solid meal within that, you will feel hungry only at that time, once you adjust to it. So our circadian rhythms, which are related to sleep, which I'll talk about in just a moment, that's that 24 hours plan of which we have fluctuations in things, but it's not just related to Gabriel and Melatonin for sleep. It's also related to other things that are going to monitor things like hunger. Right? So we will have a spike in ghrelin, which is a hormone that makes us feel hungry at our meal times. So like if you start intermittent fasting and you've been eating breakfast every day for the last several years, then you will feel hungry at breakfast time. But if you don't eat breakfast for seven to ten days, you won't feel hungry at breakfast time anymore. And you won't feel that you have low blood pressure or anything like that. And ghrelin actually gives us a pretty unpleasant feeling that's like, oh, my stomach's eating myself, I'm really hungry. It's not necessarily true hunger and you can spot that, like when you're fasting, for example, because at your regular meal time, because that's where the main spike occurs and then it kind of stays there for about the next half an hour to an hour it will be decreasing.


So after an hour it's pretty much done. And you'll find that you get really hungry leading up to your meal time. But then after about 30 to 60 minutes after your meal time, you don't really feel hungry anymore. It was just meal time dependent. Does that answer that question?


Yeah, I mean, so it happens at different times with different people, depending on when you do eat what you are eating and stuff like that. But yeah, it's pretty common. It's also common that people will have a bit of withdrawal effects towards the afternoon with either Ritalin or Dextroenthetamine, which can kind of make you feel a bit, you know, like it's harder to focus, maybe even a bit of a headache or something like that. And that can be discussed with your psychiatrist and potentially mitigated for those who is true for it's common that the psychiatrists might suggest having like half a tablet or a tablet in the early afternoon. That will mean that instead of having a quick drop off, you've got a much more moderated drop off, and then you don't feel those withdrawal effects so much, or maybe even not at all. But, yeah, just low blood pressure might just come up at that time for you because you have lunch a bit early, and maybe that's not the most substantial meal you have and stuff like that. Or maybe you have some high GI foods at lunchtime, and that could kind of make that the case as well.


It's also just important to point out with the medication and food, that because it does have a very high appetite suppression effect, that we might not feel hungry when the medication is kicked in, but still not be at our peak performance because we actually are in need of food. So we've just got to kind of pay attention to the fact that, right, I may not feel hungry, regardless of whether I'm hungry here. When would it make sense to eat? I certainly find that for myself, that I could be like, yeah, I'm right as rain. Why do I kind of feel that I'm not totally 100% right now and I'll have dex, and that's why I'm not hungry, and then I eat something, I'm like, right, okay, I'm better I'm back on. Any more questions before we jump into the sleep side?


From a health point of view? I'm not actually aware of any well founded research that shows any disadvantage. Like, I've seen some vegan propaganda that I found convincing, like, a decade ago, but I looked into that, and it was nonsense. Don't get me wrong. It's not like you want to have that as your only thing. Like, if you're eating cheese all the time. Cheese is pretty high in fat, for example. It's a very dense, like, calorically dense food cheese. So it's not like you kind of like, pile that on and energy. Right? But no, I'm not aware of any kind of major disadvantages in dairy. In fact, there are quite a few substantive advantages from having dairy products, including milks and cheeses and colostrum, which is like early mother smoke kind of thing. I think they're all fine. They're good protein sources. They have very little well, pretty low sugar. There is naturally, a bit of sugar in there, but, yeah, plenty of protein, reasonable amount of good natural fats. And the protein in dairy, because it's an animal product, is actually a full spectrum protein, meaning that it has all of the not all of the essential amino acids.


The amino acids that our body can't fabricate, it gives us. Whereas many proteins that we have, they're still good, but we need a selection of them to get a full spectrum particularly. So almost all plant proteins will be a subset of the entirety of the essential amino acids, which is you could have a few different sources that all have that issue, but it fills in the gaps, so there's no kind of problem with that. But it's just worth noting that it's good to get it all from one place if you can. Pea protein, that is a plant protein, that's full spectrum, if you're curious, or soy is not, for example. But yes, eggs, dairy, all that kind of stuff, are not going to make comment on the ethical side, by the way. That's the whole nother thing. And I don't want to stop eating dairy, but I wouldn't either. But it's incredibly difficult.


Yeah. I kind of don't want to convince myself not to eat dairies.


Yeah, I have a feeling if I looked into it too much, I might want to stop.


I get that as well. I'm not sure that free range necessarily means as much as we think it does.


Yeah, so there's a different set of standards for organic. I don't know, I just know it's different. It's a per product thing and I just don't think it's that well regulated. There are plenty of products that are sold with an organic label that don't even have a regulation around it, so it's just like I'll slap that on.


You need, like the certified organic yes, sorry. And for environmental purposes as well, you should always get grassfed, meat and dairy, I think, is generally grass fed. And the ethic stuff, like, I find if you can get it from small.


You'Ve got higher standards for animal welfare. But yeah, grass fed is always better.


And I'm stopping. That's all. Good. Oh, hold on. I'm still here. Anyway. Okay, so this video, I actually made it a bit ago. I just figure it'll go through the foundations that I can kind of just speech wise say it now, but it's only a ten minute video and then we can talk about the actual application of it or questions around and stuff like that. So figured you get the same information as everyone else. This way I'll try to make you kind of play properly through the speakers and stuff like that. But it's only a talking heads video. It's only me. Let's see. Really loud.


Just let me know. So audio coming through. Okay, hold on. It's very fine.


Yeah. Okay. Share sound and optimize the video clip.


Okay. How are you back? Can you guys see me again? Go back to Norm. Cool. I'll just share this.


I know. Look up. Since there's only like a couple of slides left anyway, I've just kind of maximized that.


But I can go through it with a volunteer. But it's either that or I can answer questions for anybody who's got them happy either way. But who's got any questions about sleep, about any of that, about how they apply it to their life, about difficulties that they have that weren't brought up there. I can give some examples, but I'm sure some will come up. Do you guys not have trouble with sleep? If so, you're the first group.


Yeah. Let me start. So is it difficulty getting sleep? Staying asleep? Like waking up too early or some combination?


Don't get me wrong. For most people who take Dextrophetamine or Ritalin, it will impede sleep. I will have a cutoff at 01:00 p.m.. I won't have any after that unless I know I'm going to have a late night or something like that. Because I know that it'll mess me around, particularly if I've worked early the next day. Same kind of thing with the amount of coffee I have and when I would have that, I'm not going to have that, like, late afternoon. There are people who can have coffee out of the end of the day. Doesn't really bother them. I think that's because they just drink tons of it and it's just water for the mail and there are people who not only can have the medication later, and that could be because if it kicks in faster and it's out of the system faster. But also there have been people, like you've said with ADHD who actually have a benefit with their sleep by taking the stimulant now, of course, because it upregulates, norepinephrine in particular, but also dopamine both of those are excitatory and neurotransmitters, so they're going to rev you up a bit.


But it might counterbalance that for some people because if your mind is just kind of like racing and going over all sorts of things and then you increase Norepinephrine, then your thinking style can become less chaotic and that might be more amenable to sleep. In the same vein, if people like, you know, have restless leg syndrome or really toss and turn and stuff like that, and this is a small dosage and they might have an advantage as well, I guess that's just kind of person to person. I've come across a handful of people for whom that's true. It's certainly not the majority, but it's not that rare either. The only reason it's like a handful because I see a lot of people with ADHD. I guess it's kind of a strange effect. And what I explained is it's the theoretical explanation that most people go with, but it's not like we absolutely know. That's why it works, actually. Well, you've got the subject of experience, so you've got information that I don't have and most people don't. Like, your psychiatrists won't have that specific experience, for example. What do you find is different for you at nighttime?


How would you describe that? Just kind of subjectively. What's different when you have it?


And because you mentioned the idea, like, you were quite stressed, you were quite anxious, more so when you weren't taking it during the day versus when you are in those situations. Our bodies kind of produce more cortisol and apart from like lots of exercise, sleep is the main way that we flush out excess cortisol. But you can't get to sleep if you got too much excess cortisol. Bit of a cycle loop there. So you might be avoiding the kind of like extra excess cortisol of being stressed out by things during the day by having it as well.


Yeah, and just related to mainly to do with generalized anxiety where people are worried about all sorts of things. So not specifically OCD, but OCD manifests in different ways that can be a component of that. Oftentimes people with anxiety like the propensity to worry and the real sense that they need to be prepared for things that might go wrong. Right. They tend to wake up early and not get back to sleep. So it's that side that they have difficulty with. And so when I work with people for whom that's true, I will set up worry time. That's not my term. It comes from the therapeutic style, but basically where they sit down with a pen and paper like very kind of strategically, like I would call it proactive product of thinking time because you don't actually want to let that time degrade into just worrying like thinking about things that you don't have any control over. It's just going through and being like, well, here's a concern that I have. Can I do something about it either now or in the future? If in the future set an alarm schedule out some time, know that that's going to happen.


If now, what can I do to interact with that in some positive way? If you do that during the day, then it can very readily like I don't think that there's anyone so far who I've worked with and kind of set up the worry time who has not then gotten rid of their terminal insomnia, which is waking up, not getting back to sleep. Terrible term because terminal sounds really bad. So very effective in that sense because if you think about it from basically the therapy that's used is metacognitive therapy. It sounds really complex, just the metaphor being like the cognitive parts. So we're talking about the thoughts that you have and rather than the thoughts that you have directly about the worry itself, which could be a driver. It's directly about the situation. It's the metaphors or the thoughts about the thoughts themselves that are about the situation. Right? And there's positive and negative beliefs about that. So the negative, of course, just like, well if I think about these things too much then it's going to stir me up and that's not so good, right? And that can cause a cycle where you kind of ramp it up because you're trying to push it away and you can't push it away and it just kind of fires up more.


But the positive belief is like I need to do this in order to be prepared. And there are probably many situations where you worry about things like you worry about something which causes you to come up with an idea that makes you more prepared for it. And then it's a note of like well I need that. I need to trust that I will do that at some stage. And when people don't have a time during the day that they do that kind of worry time that I'm talking about, or even when they start it, but they don't like have faith they will think of the stuff that's really important during that time. Then that's when they wake up in the early morning, which is just when we're sleeping lightly. And then you kind of come to the point that you're like pretty much awake, usually go back to sleep without even realizing. But if you've got something on your mind and you're like, an idea pops into your mind and you feel like you can't dismiss it because what if you don't think of that again and then you're not prepared and all the kind of anxious thoughts, then that's what keeps them up for that terminal period at the end of the night when they're trying to sleep.


So the worry time allows them to get that done. I thought I'd mention that because in case it relates to you or if somebody else has a bit of anxiety that might be helpful there.


Really? Yeah, I mean it is very simple once you've kind of got the handle on it. I actually find that almost always, it might even be every single time so far, but almost always at least there'll need to be some refining. Like I'll go through it with them, they will practice it over the next week or two and then I'll see them and it'll be kind of shaping that up. So some pitfalls like people might get caught into not understanding that it's just focusing on the things that they have control over. So they're like, yeah, I spent the time worrying. I had a really bad time. It was terrible sleep wasn't better. Or they're like, well, what can I actually feasibly do? And then we kind of go through examples for them and stuff like that. An example that comes to mind. I can think of a client that I was working with who has to do a bit of traveling for their job because they're working for a multinational company, they're managing the Australia side. They've got to fly to other countries to go and visit them. And when those flights coming up. He's had experiences in the past where if he leaves it to admin to sort out for him, they've made mistakes that have been problematic when he's just kind of gone to actually travel.


So then that worries him or worry him for like three months out of it. You'd be like thinking about a bit every day, what do I have to do to sort that? What do I have to do to sort that? So it'd be during worry time with something like that. So if it's in three months actually planning, how far out from the time do I need to spend a bit of time on it? And so for him it was and how much time do I need to schedule in? So it was actually scheduling in two weeks out from the time that he was going 3 hours. And because things can change then you want to be aware last minute the day before, 1 hour. So then that was enough time that basically it's like because he feels that the thing that he can do down the track, he's confident that he will do because he's booked it in, set the reminders, whatever else, that he can more easily dismiss the thought every day leading up to that. And he found that very effective, that once that was set down and then he's confident that what he can do to mitigate any kind of possible downside of going there and being unprepared, he will do, even though he can't do it earlier.


And it could be like, let's say that you have some conflict with somebody, they're sending you emails. Well, actually it's a pretty common thing that you want to speed people along in an organization, whether it be at work or maybe it's a telephone service and they need to sort your internet or something like that, right? You might be worried about, well, if that doesn't happen by here, there's plenty of words that could come from that. The idea is what frequency makes sense to interact. So like, let's say you sent an email the day before and you're like, okay, well I can't just like, well I probably shouldn't just like send them reminders all the time or they're going to hate me, right? So what's a reasonable kind of time that I can wait and then I'll send them an email then might be like, well, I'll wait a week, I'll set a reminder for a week away that I'm going to then email them at that point. So then you're sure it's like yep. At the time that I can interact with it meaningfully, then I will, and there's nothing that I'll have control over to actually do in a productive way until then.


Sweet. And then that allows you to not have to think about it and latch onto that thought every day until then. It's probably a lot of detail, but okay. Any more questions about anything to do with sleep?


The question, but not about sleep. Okay, well, if no one has a question about sleep, then I guess maybe we'll prioritize questions about sleep. But if there's no questions about sleep, then we'll do that. Does anybody have a question specifically about sleep? Too late. Cat.


Yeah, go for it.


So it was your psychiatrist idea.


Yeah, I mean, so it's a person to person. My experience, most people can take it every day, and they're not going to build up so much of a tolerance that it's really problematic. I'm not actually one of those people, so, like, I started taking it. I was prescribed every day, and we just realized that the tolerance was increasing too rapidly. It's like, right, okay, we've got to come up with another plan because I don't want to be taking handfuls and just, like, go down that slope. So I actually do what you do. So I take at least a couple of days off a week, and I'll just kind of plan when they are. And so that's because it's necessary. So it's not always necessary. Usually it's something where people start every day, and then they might decide to reduce them there. There are other reasons why they might do it, by the way, some people find that there may be, particularly with Ritalin, more so than Dexro amphetamine, that they're like, well, yeah, I focus, but I don't really feel quite as like myself and have to go lucky and stuff. So they want to do that to experience outside of themselves on the weekend.


So there are plenty of advantages. There's no strict disadvantages apart from, as you mentioned, you just don't have the positive effect of it on the weekend. But at the end of the day, the person making that prescription, they're responsible for any risk, and because of that, they get to manage how they do that. But not every psychiatrist will do that. It's like walking the line of don't say anything that I shouldn't say as another professional.


Any more questions, guys? Like, just at seven now, but we can build another one before we finish up, if you like. Is there anything there.


Yeah, thanks.


I can think of a situation with another client who I see who has ADHD, and so she's currently pregnant and she stopped taking the medication around pregnancy, which a lot of people do. But she found out, and I actually thought that she understood that the risk was very low and not in any way proven to be nonzero. Right. But I thought that she knew that and she was just taking the very cautious angle, which most people do when they're pregnant. You know, there are lots of things that are like tiny, tiny slither, they do it anyway. But then she found out through her obstetrician that he was just like, what cause? She thought that she had to stop it. And actually, her psychiatrist, even when she went back after speaking to the obstetrician who said, I have plenty of clients who take this while pregnant and there are not problems, I'll put it in the letter to your psychiatrist. Psychiatrists still said, no, I'm not going to prescribe it during this time. So, you know, like, they get to manage what level of risk they're comfortable with. But one would hope that as long as it's reasonably objectively safe, that they would consider it.


Like, my psychiatrist has been no problem. When I'm like, I want to try Ritalin, for example, and then I decided to go back to Dextrophonephedamine. There was no problem in asking for that. But I've spoken to people with ADHD as well who feel uncomfortable about, you know, saying that they need a higher dosage, which is true, because they don't want to come across to their psychiatrist as drug seeking. It's like, well, yeah, but you know that you actually need that. Like you're not lying. But I guess that's just about the rapport that they have or haven't developed in those communications.


Yeah, it depends what your work is. Hey. All right, guys, all the best, and I'll see you next week with some more stuff on healthy lifestyle.


Me?


Okay.


Well, I mean, because of the upper regulation of dope mean you would tend to have more kind of reflection and celebration, like internal celebration of your successes, which is really good and something right, because it spurs you want to want to do more when you're being productive a bit. For most people, it would also help with productivity, but I guess it depends how you're doing and what you're focusing on. Like, it might be just kind of rethinking, like, what situation do I want to be in by the time it kicks in so that I'm going to do something that is meaningful? Because if you change tasks too often and there's not a meaningfully finished stuff, then that will, of course, hinder productivity. At the same time, of course, you might just become really productive in an area that isn't that significant to you rather than the key part of work. Do you think that if your focus was directed on what's most important to you to get done when you're taking a medication, Rachel, that would lend itself to being meaningfully productive?


I feel like it can yeah, that's something that I'm working with another client particularly about now, he would find not related like medication or not that he would find that. So he works as a contractor so I guess he can select and order what he does with his time because he's selfemployed and there are some parts of his job that are really novel and interesting and other parts that are more repetitive and stuff like that.


So the issue for him that we've kind of reshaped a bit is that he would kind of have an umbrella task under which there's, like, normal stuff as well as like well, as long as it's kind of related to the thing that he's trying to get done, then he could convince himself that that's worth putting first and putting his time into. But of course he would lean into the stuff that's more interesting, more novel and stuff like that to the exclusion of the stuff that's harder to get done. So I suggested being really specific about what are the tasks that you find most difficult to get motivated into and then you select the time of day, the time during that session as well that you're most likely to get those things done anyway. They're the times that you've got to schedule it to and to make a clear distinction between the novel, fun stuff and the less interesting stuff. And then it might be a matter if you've got the plan, this is what I'm going to use my medication for today. That plan would want to be something that is not an umbrella containing fun stuff and not fun stuff.


It is very specifically the stuff that.


Think, I mean, I think that we all do it time to time. It's a bargaining strategy that we have with ourselves to convince ourselves that we can justify doing whatever it is that our limbic system wants us to do that's going to be fun and whatever. And we can be pretty convincing that like we've got enough time to do something that takes 3 hours in five minutes until you get to that five minutes you're like, crap. Yeah, we got to spot that like convincing side of ourselves kind of bargaining and negotiating in the background.


No worries. Alright guys, I'll see you next time. All the best.


Yeah, definitely. I had a similar thing myself. Not that I was ever particularly organized. That's not the one. But when I was young and obviously I think I've mentioned like I was diagnosed in the last couple of years with ADHD. So as a kid I didn't know what was going on. But I got told so many times by my mom and older brother, think before you talk, think before you talk, that it became like a mantra. And then I think that I was more filtered, like I'd consider before I said anything than most people. And I've actually intentionally kind of leant in the other direction because when you filtered like that, people wonder why you're filtering. Because often when people are filtering or they delay and stuff like that, it's because they're trying to think of some lie or a story or they don't want to show their true emotions, which wasn't the case for me. It was just something I always did. All right, I think it's time that we can crack in, guys. So today is going to be about like a really fairly deep dive into what anger is and the different ways that it can come up and what else it can represent and how to deal with it and things like that.


Actually, first, just let's have a reflection on last week. So we talked about Mindfulness and the homework task was just to give it a shot over the last week. Who would like to talk about their experience of giving it a crack, however it went? Sorry. Should I name names?


Mindfulness, did you end up giving Mindfulness meditation a try over the last week? No, that's all right. Well, my next question was going to be who didn't and did you kind of have it when we talked about it last week, did you think, yeah, I'll give that a go, and then it didn't happen for whatever reason or maybe that there was a sense that it just wouldn't appeal or something like that? Nick?


Yeah, it's amazing, isn't? When you're doing it regularly, you don't really realize how much it throws you around because it's just part of your usual routine. I haven't talked to some people who drink most days and they're like, I don't get hangovers. And then I'm like, well, if you can think of a time when you just do it for a week or two, did you feel better then? And it's like, oh, yeah, I feel way more healthy. Then it's like, well, the opposite of that's, the hangover. It's just that you're so used to having it every day. Did anybody get around to it, have a go, and either it went well or it didn't. Who's up?


Does that work for you to wind down and go to sleep?


Yeah. It's worth noting that I know that there's a lot of kind of apps out there and suggestions to use meditation around sleep that would generally be a different sort of meditation than mindfulness or at least not quite as mentally active. And there are some people who say that it works very well. For them, the general consensus of what works best when you find yourself thinking about stuff or not being able to shut off when you're in bed is actually to go back to whatever relaxing thing that you were doing to wind down and ideally even not even in your bed. So your bed can be clearly associated with when you are sleeping, can go to sleep. So that could be for some people watching TV even it could be audio books, it could be anything like that. And what it tends to be that is useful is something that's language based even if you're not fully paying attention to it, that interrupts that kind of that ruminative thought process and then allows you to wind down and get sleepy again. And even though it's kind of counterintuitive, you think like well, the last thing that I want to do is go and get woken up again and go to another room and stuff like that.


But when you have the consistency of doing that, then your bed becomes a really good, really well associated with actually going to sleep and then you have a tendency of basically your brain is picking up where am I? What am I doing? And stuff like that. So then what is the context? And if we stay in bed when we're, like, thinking about stuff and tossing and turning and stuff, then the context that our mind recognizes when we go to bed is like, well, here's a place that, yeah, I sleep, but I also think about stuff and digest a day and stuff like that. And we want to decouple that so that you can do that somewhere else. Or if there are particular things like if there's grief or trauma or even just like something on your mind that you really got to think about, then your mind would particularly draw you to that whenever you give space for it. So when people are distracting themselves throughout the day, then it makes them more likely to think about it the one time that they don't have any distractions when they're trying to go to sleep. And then part of it is to find time to just let your thoughts wonder whether you're going for a walk or something throughout the day to address that, but then doing that same thing if you do notice that.


You're tossing and turning and probably not going to go to sleep for a while when you are in bed to go back to that relaxing thing until you get sleepy. And when I say sleepy, it's not the same as like tired or like fatigued. It's like that sense of like I could go to sleep at this moment and then, and only then do you go to bed. And because your bed is currently associated with both sleep and thinking about stuff, it might be that it takes a couple of times in the first place in order to go to bed and then go to sleep. But if you do that consistently, even for like a week and a half, so it takes seven to ten days to reset your circadian rhythms and then you won't have to do it over and over again and that'll be the quickest way in general to get to sleep. So that was a bit of a.


Yeah, and doing it that way wouldn't be a bad way to do it. I guess in order to get the most profound benefits from the mindfulness meditation, if you do it during a time where you can really focus as well as possible, then that'll be conducive to building up the self control aspect maximally. I guess different things can be attained from mindfulness meditation, but it's just like the way that you do it and when you do it and stuff like that will be a part of how much you get of either awesome. Did anybody else give it a go over the last week or didn't? And they want to mention like where was it that the interrupt was?


When people have trouble with sleep, that's exactly the sort of thing that I suggest to have to do while they're winding down. Basically something that you're willing to stop at any time, which for me is usually something that if I've seen the show before, if I've read the book before, if I've heard the podcast before, then like, there isn't that temptation till it be like, oh, well, I'll just finish a chapter or the episode, or something like that. And that's important because the sleepiness comes in waves, as I was talking about the week before last. And if we miss that wave as and you wait till the end of the chapter of the episode or anything like that, then you've got to wait until the next one before you can actually wind down and go to sleep. That's perfect. Something that you've heard before and stuff like that. It's not too kind of alarming.


Nice. I wish I had sleep that was.


I haven't actually read the books, but everyone has a book, movies, and I think the movie good. They're just nicely kind of linked together.


All right. So today can I ask for a moment?


Yeah, absolutely.


Yeah, I'm just thinking of apps that I've come across. Like, if you remind me at another time when we were talking, I can find a link to, like, a YouTube video that has a good one. I just have to check it out. I mean, certainly if you just think of, like, is it getting me to define some arbitrary point that I'm focusing on and then to keep on returning back to it, rather than there are meditations that are, like, just imagine that you're like a leaf flowing down a stream and that you allow your thoughts to come and go and to not interact with them emotionally. Clearly there's no point of focus that you're trying to attain through that. So that wouldn't be one of them. So I know that in the Headspace app, there are a few meditations. Not all of them are mindfulness meditation and sadly, they are mislabeled as such. But there are a couple of good ones as well. I know that just because I happen to have used to be in the army, the Battlesmart app, which is just free and anyone can get it, has really good mindfulness meditation resource as well, like a TalkThrough one.


So that's another possibility, maybe. Does anybody else here have a suggestion of something that they're found is a good resource for that.


Sleep, but a.


What I was after is a resource for Natalie not to do with sleep. So not at all.


Yeah, I guess you just have to check them out and kind of like compare it to what we were talking about last week and just be like, is this actually mindfulness? Because heads is a very popular one, isn't? Like I said, a couple of them are, but there are quite a few in headspace and they're not all mindfulness meditation.


Yeah.


Yeah. And try the Battlesmart app because I know that there's only proper mindfulness meditation in that. I know a couple of the people who are part of making that app and they really understand Mindfulness. Well, all right, guys, thanks. No worries. Okay, so we'll go through first today the idea of impulsiveness and how that is related to anger. But first just going through it with the ADHD bearing, regardless of regarding impulsiveness. So what those differences are, how we differ from the average populace on average, how to maintain peak performance. And this is just like a throwback to the last couple of weeks about the considerations of diet and sleep and all that kind of stuff, so that our baseline is as good as it can be and therefore we're less likely to be impulsive or to lose our temper and all that kind of stuff. How we can train it to improve impulsiveness. And that goes back a few weeks ago when we were talking about well, sorry, last week when we were talking about mindfulness this is a clear way to train self control and then talk about how to compensate for relative weaknesses while we do all of these things to give ourselves the best shot.


And we can certainly dramatically improve our well, decrease our impulsiveness. But at the same time, especially for some of us, we're going to still have impulsiveness compared with the average person. So I just make a note of when we have the opportunity to pick who we're working with or pick who all around us, who might be able to have strengths where we have relative weaknesses. And that can be a helpful thing, too, I think. I've got a video on that as well. And then specifically to do with anger. So ADHD and anger. And then we talk about emotional dysregulation in general, which is tied in to that impulsiveness, but also stress and stuff like that. What anger really foundationally is, you know, from a primal level, why is it there? What do we note as specifically anger versus, like, most terms that are very common. There are more vague definitions that are used in pop culture and stuff like that. And we refer to like, rage or like the action of rage as anger or something like that. So I'll define exactly what it is in this context that I'm referring to and then how vulnerability can be overlaid by anger and how there's a reinforcement process there.


And then this idea of secondary gain. So secondary gain is when there is some sort of function, some sort of thing that we want in some way, even if we aren't consciously paying attention to it, that we get from some sort of display. So like displaying anger or displaying rage, what else might that have got for you that could actually reinforce and make it more likely that we would use it? So I talk about how that can come up in arguments and stuff like that. And it's not just about anger that relates to secondary gain. There's secondary gain about like why do we cry in certain situations? Or why do we throw a tantrum in any kind of way, like these different things and noting that, sure, I mean, we might feel that we're completely out of control. But we might also be more likely to express it in a certain way. Because there's something else that we're getting from it that we don't actually need to consciously recognize. But it gets reinforced because there's a relief or there's something that we get from it that's not actually noted on a conscious level. So just bringing that kind of further awareness.


So a reflection. The experiences with meditation. We chatted about that. Wasn't sure that I had this app. It should have been just before the last one pomodoro time. So why do people with ADHD tend to be more impulsive than others? So I'll just move the much of this is going to be revision related to the impulsiveness. So there's less activity in the interior cingulate cortex, the ACC and the dorsilateral prefrontal cortex. And as I've mentioned in the past, the interior cingulate cortex is about slowing down our response so that we have time to then utilize our dorsalater prefrontal cortex and actually decide to do something different to inhibit a response, whether it be action or a certain kind of thought sequence. And then to go in another direction because we have less activity in both of these areas then whatever kind of you think of like the ID if you think of like, Freud stuff or just like the emotional driver. If it had nothing filtering it that's going to bear itself more rapidly and with a higher volume, in a sense, for people with ADHD or else being equal because there's less restraint. There's less of the breaks being put on because there's less activity in general in the interior signal cortex and the doorstep prefrontal cortex.


Both of these, as I've said in the past, can be trained. And we'll talk about that today and we've talked about it to do with mindfulness and stuff like that. And because they're both very resource intensive parts of the brain and that they're not required to keep us alive. Like our autonomic nervous system, if that were to stop at any point, then our body stops functioning. But our prefrontal cortex, which has these kind of higher cortical attributions like that filtering process of I don't want to do that, I'm not going to do that. Instead of the limbic system which is more kind of central in our brain, which is linked to these primal urges that we have. Okay, so maintaining peak baseline performance. So this is all a bit of revision as well. So in order to do it, we need to make the sacrifices required to sleep. Well, I say it will be worth it, because I note that when it comes to sleep, when I'm working with somebody to do with sleep normally, I mean, most of the time it's about convincing people that it's actually going to be worth it to, like, say, decidedly get up when they don't want to, or decidedly get up at the same time throughout the week, even on the weekends when they don't actually have to, for example, or to shuffle things around so that you have these periods of hyper focus.


Or things that you normally do late at night earlier on. Like these are all in some way compromises that we need to make in order to get good sleep often. And they might be things that we really feel like are important to us or we treasure. And therefore it's that convincing part, that kind of decision to be like, well, it is going to be worth it. And if your sleep is being kind of here and there for a long time, then you kind of need to lean in as an experiment in the first place to see how good consistent sleep can be, to kind of prove to yourself, be like, yeah, it's totally worth making these compromises. Keeping your diet in check. And we talked about particularly to do with not having too many high GI carbohydrates, especially when they're not moderated by a decent fiber source and protein that will moderate the absorption of them. So then by doing that, we have these fluctuations. And because when we get too much Glycogen or the primary carbohydrate in our bloodstream at any one time, then we release insulin and that's an all or nothing approach.


So then it takes all of the carbohydrates out of our bloodstream and then we feel like we're really hungry. Or like we could be hungry and we could be more likely to be impulsive to show our temper and stuff like that at those times because we don't have as many resources that are required to run those expensive parts of the brain. Like the torsodo, preponent cortex and anterior singular cortex. Managing stress, and that includes doing exercise, having fun, having a laugh with people, making time for yourself, just to go and chill, to go to a place that you enjoy, perhaps, and feel human and not just kind of feel like you're on a treadmill of life and certainly socializing, especially with people that we feel connected with and we care about. All of these things are going to through doing them on a regular basis maximize our baseline. Performance when it comes to hindering impulses. Basically deciding to do, like living within our decisions of how we want to live and what we want to do and not doing the things that we don't. Training to combat it. So this is to do with the mindfulness meditation.


As I mentioned last week, there are plenty of studies that show that this really directed intentional mindfulness meditation. It is specifically training, attention switching or self control. So like your thought wonders, I'm going to then impose that I come back in. So then you're deciding where your attention goes, you're deciding what you think about and. Then of course you think of how that could be applied to situations where, like, let's say you're driving a car and somebody goes in front of you, cuts you off and then slows down, and then you can't get past them. Like, that's something that can be annoying, I can certainly vouch for. And we could get caught up in the process of being like, what they're messing up for the rest of us. This is unfair. It's this kind of person that I don't like all that kind of stuff. So then we through that thought process, we're getting more angry. And then another part might be the action as well, like yelling in the car or something like that. But even without necessarily having the action, the thought process is also something that through mindfulness meditation, through building up this self control that we can inhibit.


So you'd be like, well, that happens. Say the person gets in front of you and then slows down. You could also think, well, hold on a second. For all I know that they could be in a massive rush. I've probably done this to people without even realizing, and it's fine. Like, am I really even in a rush? Does it matter if I slow down a little bit more? That kind of thing. And then through that different thought process that we can use that self control gain through mindfulness meditation to go in, we actually don't even get as angry and then we don't like ruminate about it, think about it as we feel angry and stuff like that, or want to make the actions associated with rage.


It reminds me of a seinfeld bit. He's like, I'm a good person. I'm always waving people in. Go ahead. I don't know if anyone watches. And what about giving the finger to me? I think it'd be much more offensive if somebody gives you the toe. They got to get the shore off. They're going to get the toe off anyway. Yeah, absolutely. Where was I up to there? Yeah. So mindfulness meditation increases the size of the interior signal cortex. So there's little studies to show that that area of the brain that happens to be smaller on average for people with ADHD, that actually increases in size. When people do mindfulness meditation and general habits of yielding to impulses, they weaken these areas. So if we get in the process of just doing exactly what we feel like, instead of delaying it, instead of kind of making more decisions about like, well, do I want to do that versus that kind of thing, then? Because we're utilizing these inhibitory parts of our brain less then it's a use it or lose it thing. Kind of like in the same way, just throwing it back to strength. If you have a lifestyle that might be more pleasant for a while, where you don't have to lift up heavy things and stuff like that, it is going to mean that you won't be able to lift up heavy things as well when you have to because you haven't been doing it and your system is like, well, I don't need that ability.


Then each time you resist the temptation, you strengthen your self control. And even if you just delay it and if you do it anyway, like, say, having chocolates or something like that, let's say it's something that you wanted to kind of cut down. Even if you delay it and still do it like you still go and have the chocolates after 20 minutes or something like that. Instead of doing it straight away through that 20 minutes, you're exercising that willpower, and it's still building that part of the brain. And then through doing that, over time, it's going to increase your likelihood to be able to fully decide not to actually have it. So don't think that there's any sense of like, well, I failed, I did it. In the end, it's like, well, you didn't fail because you did some exercise that's going to make you better at that ability of self control in the future. So in short, practice discipline and you build discipline. I've also got over there. You can also train me by practicing your music skills. And don't get me wrong, if you just pick up an instrument and that you know how to play, or you play a song that you know how to play and you're just doing it for enjoyment, then that's not going to build your self control so much.


But like the act of practicing when you don't necessarily feel like it to do scales and stuff like that, that isn't necessarily like super fun. These will all strengthen our self control and our music skills as it happens. All right, so compensating for remaining weak points. Everyone has strengths and weaknesses and ADHDs tend to be creative and passionate and exciting. But impulsiveness includes a tendency to overspend, to over invest in ideas without considering the downsides, to take risks and many other full steam ahead pitfalls if you set up your environment to rein, you in like keeping money in. A separate savings account, especially when on the holidays or gift shopping or partnering with people you know better at administration and organization skills, even if you think that they're boring or something like that. Exploration on the next page of that. But these things that we can do, these aren't like acts of self control. It's kind of like, well, if I'm doing some reasonable amount to maximize my baseline performance through good sleep and diet and exercise and stuff like that, and maybe there's some ability or some aspect of training and intentionally exercising self control so you get better in that you kind of come up to a certain level, but it's still worth kind of noting.


Well, like wherever I'm at, I can still shape things so that I don't require as much self control. When it comes to crucial stuff, like if you know, for example, that you are going to or you are likely to impulsively spend money, then just like having a barrier where it's like maybe you got a savings account and there's not like super fast access to that or something like that. So you've got to think twice before you buy that new phone or watch or whatever it is. These are all good things to kind of keep in mind. Regardless of how good we get at this act of selfcontrol, we've still got to know ourselves and realize what should we have in place so that we're going to make up for whatever flaws are still there. So let's see. I think I can actually I want to try something. It has an option where it says optimize for video clip. So I just want to give that a go. Let me know if it works. Okay, let's see.


I just need to get your faces back.


Yes. So just guys, let me know if it starts and doesn't come across well, but hopefully it will work.


Sure.


Right.


Right.


Okay, I'll just find a way to get back my slides. So of course that video, he was just kind of reinforcing that point that I was making about and he was applying it to business and building a team and a business and stuff like that in that kind of way. Entrepreneurialism, but just that when you work with people who have strengths in the opposite area can be really ideal. And we don't always have that flexibility, but it's certainly something that we sometimes have. Many of the people who have gone through this group are in fact running companies and stuff like that and do have the ability to select in some way the people who they're hiring. And just like he's noting, we may very well have a tendency to like I find that people with ADHD often get along pretty well. We have some fun kind of similarities, and we might have a tendency to find people who are, like, pretty kind of straightlaced and also good at, like, the general kind of consistency and stuff like that. You might have a tendency to see them as boring and therefore like to have a tendency to surround ourselves with people who are more similar to us, but actually having a mix is ideal and also matches up with that.


Research around teams, including people with ADHD and Neurotypicals do better than teams with only neurotypicals and that only happens when they're picking up the slack of one another and utilizing their best strengths within that that are diverse. I'm just going to refresh that. Does anybody have any comments, questions, thoughts about.


Yeah, absolutely. When it comes to this group, for example, I know that not everything's been perfect when it comes to organizing and stuff like that. A couple of the times, whether the wrong links sent out and stuff. But I wouldn't have had the confidence to think that I could run this group if I didn't have people like Natalie, who owns a practice, and Cass, who's our practice manager, who are much more organized than I am to keep everything kind of going. Maybe I'd do it for one round and then I'd be like, Well, I've done that, what else can I do? Which we might have the tendency to do chase novelty and stuff like that, but through pairing myself with people who are better at those areas that aren't strengths of mine. Then here we're going. It's like the six one or something like that. It's been running for almost a couple of years. All right, we just had a bit of a chat there, I guess. Pomodoro time. Pomodoro time. So anger and ADHD. Now, this video is just kind of a reinforcement. You could check it out yourself later if you have the slides and you're interested.


She's just talking about what I mentioned earlier when it comes to less inhibition and therefore a higher emotional volume. And this relates to all emotions, whether we're happy, sad, angry, anything like that. There's more expression of kind of the emotional desires underneath because there's less inhibition on average people with ADHD. And for that reason, we can feel or experience our emotions with a higher volume than the average person. So it's common for people with ADHD to struggle controlling anger. Now, not everyone with ADHD will have difficulty with anger. Most people with ADHD do have general emotional dysregulation and that impulse stuff that I was talking about before. But sometimes I've had people in this group just be like, oh, that doesn't sound like me at all. And that's all good. I think that it's. In my experience, it's still the majority of people with ADHD, particularly males, who recognize some challenge with their temper that they want to control. And of course, as we get older and stuff like that, we get better with it, but it's still something to work on in general. So it's worse when you're stressed and it can be managed with the methods related to impulsiveness and stress familiar today.


So what is anger? So when angry, we almost always think things are unfair or that they should be different, particularly like, someone else is not doing what they should do or they should do something different and in relation to us. So that sense that we're being wronged in some way and so questioning the basis for our anger because it's very much about being assertive and standing up for ourselves when we're being wronged. Like, you imagine not having anger at all in a situation where somebody is kind of walking all over us, right, that wouldn't be ideal because we'd be likely to kind of take a passive approach where it wouldn't necessarily be ideal. And anger itself isn't rage. It's not like we might kind of think about it with yelling at people or in some way expressing in a really kind of uncontrolled way. But actually you can respond to the sense of anger, which is like the recognition in the environment that somebody is mistreating you or wronging you and that you've got to stand up for yourself and just be like, okay, well, maybe I don't want to be friends with that person who's making me feel crappy all the time.


Or maybe I've got to kind of mention the way that you do this. It does bother me. So anger is very useful for that. But because it's about picking up some sense of being wronged, when we try to question the basis for our anger, it can feel wrong. And I use this language intentionally, like letting a threat crawl into your bed. It's like that's your protection, your safety, in a sense. So letting it go is something that conjures a lot of mistrust. And that's a big part of why it's very difficult to, once we get really angry, to actually be able to then work away from it. And in the same vein, as we get angry, part of what happens is we get Adrenalized. And that means that it's going to activate our sympathetic nervous system which is associated with being Adrenalized, being active and stuff like that, and less so. Our parasympathetic nervous system, these are the central nervous systems that sorry, peripheral nervous systems that work in tandem. But when we have a lot of activation of our sympathetic nervous system, what this does is it diverts resources to our in preference to our bigger muscles in our arms and legs.


So that if we had to fight for our life or run for our life, if it was like that kind of threat, then we could. And it does that by taking resources away from organs like our brain and our stomach. Part of the reason why when people have a lot of issues with anger over time or even anxiety, that also ramps you up in a similar way. But it's more to do with feeling helpless rather than that sense of anger where when people are angry, by the way, they actually rate their own capability as higher, they feel more powerful. They can have problems with digestion because they're like if they're always kind of ramped up a bit, they never get to fully settle down because they're not getting enough resources to their stomach to sort out all the digestive digestive aspects. But when we don't get enough resources to our brain, like I said, the prefrontal cortex and related particularly to the self control aspects of the dorsaladal prefrontal cortex and interior singular cortex, they're expensive, as in they require a lot of resources and if we shut them down for a bit, we don't die.


So then they're the areas that are going to not get the resources when we don't have enough resources in general going to our brain. So then we have less inhibition. Like the matter we get, the more Adrenalized we get, we have less inhibition, less self control. So that's where it's important. And I'll talk about in a bit to spot the early warning signs so that we can get in as early as possible when we still have our faculties all there. Because once we're in that mode, if we're like all the way at 100%, we're not going to have enough access to our kind of inhibitory faculties to be able to kind of think rationally and do something different that's why we got to get in earlier. So primarily, and I mentioned this a bit, but primarily, anger protects us from being wronged or hurt. So letting go of anger requires courage and trust and anger is often a means of avoiding taking personal responsibility as well. So like in that picture where he's like getting angry at a computer, which of course we know that a computer is like this kind of mechanistic process in a sense, if we're interacting with it and it's not working, it's something that it's in our control, right?


It's the same kind of thing. If we're like rushing and then we stub our toe or something like that, we get harder and harder too.


Sure, in a sense, if we have a bias of leaning toward putting others ahead of ourselves or we're going to be more compassionate in that sense. And when I was talking about that thought process that we might have differently when we're in a car and we kind of like think, well, I could have done that too, DA DA DA. This is empathizing. And then once you fully empathize with somebody's position and to the point that you can understand, like, yeah, I'd probably do that too, then the anger tends to melt away. So certainly compassion can be an antidote to feeling anger at those moments. And some people have a tendency to lean more toward compassion than others. It's part of it in terms of being necessarily a bad character trait. So to me, the way that I'm talking about it as a sense of this protective measure that can be utilized in a good way, that there is a primal reason for it being there, that if it wasn't useful for our survival and our interaction with one another, it wouldn't be there. But certainly like letting it go, a mark that wouldn't be a great character trait.


Elicited yeah, and I'll talk about some ways that that can come up today. So part of it, like I said, is if we don't want to take personal responsibility for something, then we can react with anger and feel that it's not our fault. And therefore, we don't have to kind of, in a sense, like, take responsibility, blame ourselves for what's going on compared with sitting with the sense of, like, okay, things aren't going well. I got to slow down. I've got to do something differently because I'm in control. And I'll talk about how it relates to vulnerability and secondary gain that's also in the same vein in the next coming slides. Let's see. Yeah. So just down the bottom there. So we may develop a pattern of showing angle loud and early when we're afraid to signal that we're scary. Now, basically, you think of the person, like, at a pub who, like, they get in fights all the time because they respond very quickly and aggressively with a lot of anger in situations that there is a threat and even, like a small sign of a threat, they'll react in a very strong way to.


And there's a sense of there's a threat in the environment, whether it's a physical threat or anything else in the social environment, then that can be taken as, like, well, there's vulnerability. There potentially where we could be harmed. We may or may not have some degree of control and that feeling of vulnerability is a very uncomfortable one. And if we overlay that at some stage with anger and then we feel much better, it will leaves us from the sense of having to take responsibility for what's going on in those situations where we're feeling overwhelmed or it takes away the feeling of vulnerability because we feel stronger, we feel like we can do something. Then there's a reinforcement aspect because it's like, well, this feeling happened in this situation, relief happened. So then our system is going to lean toward that in the same way as we lean toward anything that feels good or relieving or something like that without even necessarily consciously being aware of it. So then going back to that person who gets in fights in the pub, the more that they do that and overlay a sense of vulnerability due to a threat with anger, the more they're reinforcing that process and then they'll have a tendency to do it more and more and through gaining awareness and stepping back from it.


And I guess that could relate to what you were saying, Nicole, about there's a sense of if they have a big ego and they're putting themselves forward, then they're likely to let themselves go into those reinforcement patterns further on anger and vulnerability. So anger can make us temporary feel strong when we are truly vulnerable in a way that we can't change. So I've got that picture there of kind of scary looking situation in a hospital. It is pretty common. I used to work in community chronic conditions for six months as part of my masters and so I'd work with people who had recently had heart attacks or they've recently been diagnosed with some sort of severe chronic illness. Chronic being, it's going to last a long time, perhaps throughout their whole life. And in those situations they need to know what the doctor is trying to tell them and they are truly vulnerable. They've just found out that all of this stuff is going on and because of that vulnerability they could end up being like getting really mad at doctors and anybody in the kind of hospital and stuff like that. Whether they show rage or not, that kind of sense of lack, you know, they're no good, DA DA DA.


And they do that because it's a more comfortable feeling than just being vulnerable and being like, look, I need you to take your time and let me know what I need to know. But unfortunately, when they show anger in those situations that's going to drive them away from the care that they could have. It makes people often avoid the very people who are trying to help them. Because of that, it becomes a real problem. Part of the therapy that I do with people sometimes I'd come in and I could clearly see they don't trust people in the medical profession. They don't want to bar of them. And this has happened since their illness. And because they felt really vulnerable and getting them to feel the courage to kind of lean back into okay, I am vulnerable, they are trying to help that kind of thing and to get rid of the anger that's necessary to allow them to get the help that they can get. Other examples are like when we mess up big at work or we're failing at school or we become sick or something like that and we feel like there's a threat, we're vulnerable, get angry about it, we decide that it's not our fault, we don't have to take responsibility and there's a reinforcement aspect.


In a sense. Like we try to direct anger and sometimes we can pick a target. Oftentimes that target isn't really responsible or they're just nearby and that's. When people kind of copper lashing when they don't deserve it. It's a sense of, yeah, like you've got something to do with it, you've got something where you feel you can act out your desire to feel stronger and then to feel stronger. And like I said, it is also associated with when you ask people like how capable they are when they're angry versus when they're not. They actually rate their capability as higher when they're angry. So it does make us feel more confident or strong when we are angry as well, which is more comfortable than feeling vulnerable so we can push away people wanting to help us. As I mentioned, our avoidance of the feeling of vulnerability dish habituates us to it and it makes it increasingly difficult to face. There are situations where there are some sort of threats, there's some sort of vulnerability that we all experience on some regularity depending on our lifestyles. And the more that we kind of lean into that, we're like, oh, yeah, like, there is something that I'm experiencing there, and we feel it, and we soothe from it.


The more we can do that, and we can deal with the feeling. If we get into a real habit of pushing it away and deciding that it's everyone else's fault instead of ours and therefore feeling angry, then that feeling of vulnerability and uncertainty actually gains more and more power over us. Because it's the fear of the unknown. We disobituate to it in the same way as like a person who is afraid of heights. It is the feeling of uncertainty that they might fall when they're at a height that makes them feel very uncomfortable. There's a threat, there's a risk there. And if they physically avoid going to heights and stuff like that, so then they don't have to experience that particular uncertainty, then they get less and less able to experience it, they disobituate to it and through doing that, they become more and more afraid of heights. In the same way, the vulnerability gains more of a control. In this situation, once we're able to identify that anger is misplaced, we can practice dealing with vulnerability and it does get easier as we do so as well. All right, anybody have any questions quandaries about any of that?


We just have one more section today.


Yeah, it's just a necessary thing. Like we feel vulnerable when we realize that there is some threat that could harm us, right? Say the simple situation if somebody is mouthing off, like they might start a fight with us, then there's a sense of vulnerability. It's like, oh, that person could hurt me. And in the same way it could lead to wanting to feel anger. So it's like, well, I can hurt them and therefore I can take that on. But there's also vulnerability when it just comes to like, let's say it's like we're not doing well at university or something like that. And then we could be like, there's a sense of vulnerability there. Like, I do care about how well I do and I feel like it's getting out of hand and I'm not doing as well as I want. That's the sense of vulnerability there. So it's just like a necessary spotting of the threat in a similar way to overlaying with anger. In that situation, we might be like, well, I don't care about it, and to decidedly not do the things that have made us feel vulnerable, like, not do the things that we feel like we're not good at because we don't want to feel that vulnerability.


So yeah, it's a normal feeling that comes from situations that we come across all the time. In some sense or another, it feels unpleasant, but it's a useful feeling to have. Like, anxiety feels unpleasant, but anxiety has a function as well. Anxiety is the feeling of like, there's something in the future that might go wrong if I don't sort it out. And the anxiety is the feeling to compel us to do something about it. Well, if we didn't have that anxiety about something, then let's say I'm like, well, if I don't, let's say, pay a speeding ticket or something like that, then I have anxiety that it's going to get they're going to charge me more and more and more. That anxiety can make me go and pay that speeding ticket even though I don't really want to give them that money. And that's a useful thing because without that anxiety driver, then we wouldn't have done it. So all of these kind of feelings that we think of like, well, that's negative. They're all there for a reason. I realize that people have different views based on whether they have more of a religious or creationist kind of view of the world or anything like that.


But certainly my idea in some sense is that we have evolved through natural selection, which means that people who had traits that didn't help them, whether it be like feelings or leanings or anything like that, that didn't in some way help them survive, and that's surviving in a group way, right? Like also getting along with people in a trial so that they don't kill you or throw you out and all that kind of stuff. If it wasn't somehow useful, then we would have died. Like, those people die off with those traits and then they don't get passed down genetically. The traits over millions of years that we have had passed down to us, they're the ones that led to some sort of advantage either in the social setting so that we could survive there, or in whatever settings that we were in. Which I realize is different than kind of the setting of modern day life. And because of that, I would generally go with the assumption that all the feelings that we have, all these kind of leanings that we have, they are actually practically functional in some way. So I hope that if anybody it doesn't matter if you see it in a different way.


I'm just kind of saying how I think about it. All right, last pomodoro set. Last pomodoro set. So discover your early actually, second last one. Maybe discover your early warning signs. So as I was talking about, like, if we get to the point where we're really angry, we don't have the facilities that we have when we're karma to think about it in a different way and to do different things and stuff like that. We tend to just kind of go with whatever compulsions that we have to more of a degree when we get really angry. And that's why it's important to recognize your early warning signs. So if you ask yourself these questions, how do you know when you're getting stressed in general? And we often have different tells that we can pick up in our self, like maybe for people who have long hair that might go over the face. Sometimes when you're happy, when things are all going well and stuff like that, it doesn't really bother you. And if you find that you keep on kind of pushing it out or you're scratching or whatever it is. People have these different things that they tend to do when they're feeling more stressed or bothered.


And those are the times that you're more likely to experience your temper getting out of control. Oftentimes when I chat with clients, it'll be useful to get them to ask their spouse to be like, well, like, is there anything that I do sometimes that you think like, oh yeah, I'll steer clear of him or her now. And because they often spot things that they may not have even mentioned to us, that they can see it because they're from the outside in and we don't necessarily know that we're doing those things, but there are signs that we're getting angry. Do you already know how to tell when you are getting angry? What are the signs that you already pick up on? Do your friends or loved ones see the changes in you like I was talking about and the activity. So looking at that picture, this is something that I do. I think the imagery kind of makes more sense. The way that I would do it with kids, which is like a volcano where you're exploding at the very highest level. And then there are these different stages and essentially once we figure out all of these different early warning signs so I'd get a specific situation, be like, well, remember like a recent time when you felt like you got angry, what was the situation?


And I'd ask them things like what time of day was it? What had happened earlier that day? Things that they may not even necessarily pair with, oh, like that stressed me out. I knew that I was a bit bothered earlier, but I didn't really kind of spot it at the time.


Yeah. And we would go through and identify looking at the emotions that you feel and people just have different subjective ways like, well, I was a bit frustrated or I was a bit peeved or whatever. And then kind of getting up the list in different ways that I explain it. So that can be useful as like when they recognize that these notions are true for them, then they can be early warning signs also the thoughts. So particularly those things around, like it's unfair, they shouldn't have done that, they should do this, that kind of thing. But these are the kind of thoughts around anger. Physiological changes are like heart rate and sweat and some people feel hot or they notice that they sweat or maybe their hands get clammy or any of these kind of things. So with that particular situation, it'd be like, well, leading up to it, once I've got a kind of sense of when did they start getting agitated, when did it kind of lead? Then I'd ask them that question about like, what did you notice in your body as those things were happening? And then behavioral changes, and some of these are going to be clear behavioral changes that you know about, but there are also a bunch of them that most of us do in some way, whether we know it or not, when we get angry.


So our voice, female and male, will often get deeper and louder when we're expressing anger, even if we don't think that we're expressing it. And sometimes this can be really confronting for people to realize, like parents when they're like, oh, I didn't realize that. I was like, I was doing that a bit with my kids and I didn't even know. And you can have a bigger posture, stand closer to people, like basically looking more intimidating as this natural way without even realizing it, necessarily frowning and stuff like that as well. So once we recognize all of those, we place them on the ladder, kind of like we figure out the order of them going up and then draw a couple of lines and then come up with different strategies for each of them when you're only a little bit annoyed. And I'd kind of guide the sections based on what they say is like, yeah, I can identify this is kind of different than this. And in terms of how much control they have, then it'd be like, well, maybe when you're only just getting a little bit annoyed, then it might be worth taking a break, grabbing glass water, giving yourself some space even like doing that kind of empathetic perspective taking of the other people involved, that kind of thing.


Getting a little further up when you may not have the ability to necessarily to think in that empathetic way as readily because you're kind of getting more annoyed than doing things like some slow breathing techniques or diaphragmatic breathing and things like that. These are things that we can work in there. And then once it gets to a stage where you're just about to blow your lid, then the strategies are simpler again. It's like, well, maybe just like exit and stuff like that. Like, when I worked with kids, like, say, teenagers at school, if they find that they really have trouble moderating their temper when they're in classrooms, oftentimes they'll get, like, a chill out card, they call it, where they're allowed to just kind of place that on the table, not say anything, and they can leave, and they don't get in trouble for that. So then it gives them the option, if they notice when they're already at that escalated stage that they can leave without necessarily having to explain themselves which might then lead to more exacerbation. Now, here's that aspect of secondary gain. So could people manipulate each other without fully knowing it?


So often externalized behaviors, they serve functions for us without our full awareness I was talking about earlier because they get reinforced. So you may have noticed that people receive compassion or are let off the hook when they cry, for example. And most people say crying is involuntary. But actually the sound and even the chemistry of tears differ in signal based crying that we're doing intentionally versus the involuntary crying that we do when we're truly profoundly upset. You probably recognize, like with kids, if you're a parent, then you kind of hear them from the other room and you're like yeah, they just bung me on. Or other times, like it sounds completely different and you're like you run in there because you know that something's really wrong. Now, few people will blatantly fake cry to make their loved ones do what they want. But a deep, honest look inwards reveals that they desired x and cried to achieve it. So like I mentioned with, because people tend to receive compassion or let off the hook and that could be in arguments or whatever it is, then they can because they feel relieved when that happens, when they feel bombarded that the crying can get reinforced.


So then without even realizing that there's some kind of intentional underneath it all aspect of them crying that then, because it's being reinforced happens more readily at those times when they feel bombarded and then recognizing like okay, yeah, I do tend to cry when I want this to happen. There's probably a link there, and you can untie it from there, because it can be very unhelpful. If, like, for example, in a spouse relationship, one on one relationship like that, if every time your partner brings up a certain thing that you find really challenging to talk about, that you cry, and then they stop talking about it, then you don't get to address it, and then you don't get to move it off the table. And that can cause real problems in the relationship over time because you don't get to sort things out. So behaviors can be reinforced and functions later served without conscious awareness. Now, anger and secondary gain, so that's secondary gain related to crying as another example. Anger may serve to make you heard or silence others because you want to win or just feel overwhelmed. You may punish people for upsetting you by blocking them out, so giving them the cold shoulder or by making them afraid.


And I've certainly come across this when I've done relationship counseling with people, where, yes, it's a good idea to not get into trying to sort out the weeds of an argument or conflict when you're already too angry to reasonably come to a good compromise because you're just not likely to come up with that compromise together in a reasonable way. So then, yes, it's a good idea to kind of have a way that you can step out of it as long as you do find a situation to come back in. But oftentimes using that as an excuse, they know that their partner, for example, sees that they're giving them the cold shoulder, feels bad about it, and they want to punish their partner because they are mad at them. And then they under the guise of, well, I'm still frustrated. I need to have more time to chill before we come back. They're actually using that cold shoulder to punish them and to do with the rage. So that can even be like in the other room. Like, maybe you never yell to your partner or never yell, like at your partner, but you leave the room.


Like you make a whole lot of noise or you do things loudly or slam doors or anything like that. And then your partner hears that in the other room and that shows them that you're angry. And then there's a sense of messing with the power dynamic through that. There's a secondary gain aspect through that and through recognizing that secondary gain aspect, that's where with that awareness and you can cut those things out that are unproductive. Rage may even scare people from the other room when you haven't hurt them. I was talking about. So you got to ask people around you when you were enraged how they felt and what they noticed, like what they heard or whatever it was, or even just kind of thinking back to times and to ask yourself this question if I wanted to achieve something with my anger here in a certain situation, what might that be? And if there's some sort of reasonable answer, okay, like, yeah, that was attained through anger, whether I was planning for it or not, then that's a good sign that there's a secondary gain aspect of play. All right, so that can be a pretty confronting session.


I know there were probably alexander, can.


So it's worth asking yourself the question, if I wanted to achieve something with my anger here, what would it be with the idea that if you can be like, well, okay, even though I wasn't planning to do X, Y and Z, through expressing my anger, that was achieved. Did that feel relieving or whatever it was? This is a way that we can recognize secondary gain because it's not necessarily like it's not a planned conscious thing where we're like, I want to manipulate the person this way by showing rage, or I want to make them feel a certain way. It can be that reinforcement aspect that we're not truly consciously aware of. So we've got to be like, well, what might it be if there was a function being served here? All right, so by the way, just so the homework to consider for next session is just to consider these ideas. Do you usually get angry only when in a rush or already worn down as like, this can be like you're overwhelmed wanting to not take responsibility for that. The anger serves the function of being like, well, it's something else's fault, or It's someone else's fault, not mine.


Are you getting angry at objects to avoid owning your error? Like that guy punching the computer or something like that? And that relates to that first point. Have you experienced getting angry to avoid feeling vulnerable? As in, like, if there's a sense of, like, something could happen either socially or physically or anything like that, that's a risk to us, that we would feel harmed, we would feel bad. Even related to stuff like the university example, where it's like, well, sitting with the feeling of like, yeah, well, I do care how well I do, and that does feel bad that I haven't been doing as well. Okay, I recognize that. What do I want to do with that now? Rather than just being like, you get angry at the person who made the assignment or the grade or whatever it is, when actually they're just doing the same things for everyone else, for example, and then it throws you off. And that anger can even make you lead to difficulty in kind of really engaging with your assignment because you have the need in order to feel angry, to dismiss the utility of the assignment or of the test or whatever it is.


And might there be secondary gain from your display of anger, something else that's attained, even if you didn't necessarily plan for that? Nowhere. Just a few minutes over. Does anybody have any questions, anything they wanted to say about that before we finish up today?


Well, depending on the situation, I guess there are a few different ways that it could be addressed. If, for example, there are things that you allow to happen throughout the day that really kind of pull you down. But for example, a lot of times parents don't want to get they don't want to be the bad guy or to be firm with their kids, but then they have to ask for something 50 times or something like that and then that's going to lead to fatigue. So like being being honest about your own limitations. Be like, look, if I if I keep on allowing all of these things to happen or I keep on, like, you know, like like doing all of these things, trying to be Superman, then I know that by the end of the day that I'm going to feel so drained. And I don't want to feel that all the time. Or it could also be just like some of the strategies that we talked about today of like, do I particularly feel down at the end of the day in a way that I could probably improve through diet, exercise, sleep, or anything like that, that addressing those would be valuable.


And certainly by utilizing self control at times when you don't normally or when we don't normally, even if it's just delaying and doing mindfulness meditation, this is going to train it so that not only will you have a higher capacity of it in those moments early in the day, but the tank of self control will be greater. And hopefully then with a few of these adjustments would be enough to last out through the day. So I guess those different points of attack depending on what's kind of most relevant to do first.


Yeah, exactly.


Okay. It's not a simple answer because it's just like doing all of these things. They're all going to be beneficial in their own way. So it's like kind of looking at the situation that you have and being like, what of these kind of all of these strategies of, like, increase baseline, be fair on yourself, recognize or train your self control. Like, what of these things? Can I adjust in some way first? And any of them are going to have some sort of benefit. So just like it gets easier and easier as you build up more. Thank you very much, guys, and I'll see you next week. Cheers.


Between work and stuff like that.


Wow.


It's good that you've got a hardcover diary. It's one of those things, like, it's so useful if you can get into the pattern of doing it, but yeah, it's tough to convince ourselves sometimes. Yeah.


Yeah, there are advantages of doing it digitally where you can, like, obviously get alarms and stuff like that. But honestly, if I think of the time that I was managing the most, like, I had a whole bunch of clients and stuff like that. If I didn't have a hardcover diary, then just wouldn't have been able to do it. Keep track of everyone and all the meetings that I had all the time.


Yeah, it helps when there's, like there's a clear reason, you know, that you're going to open it every day because there's at least something on there every day. It's generally fallen apart for me when I'm not doing, like, a job like that, where if there are several days in a row with nothing on the page, then you lose the pattern of opening it up.


We could hear you, Marissa. There was just a bit of delay, sort of like kind of all come through at once kind of thing. A bit.


So hope we get started in a few minutes, guys. But if there's any questions or you just want to converse with one another or anything like that, by all means.


Yeah.


I'm hanging out, I guess this week and next week are on different aspects of it. We're particularly talking about impulsiveness and temporar today.


Have you had a lot on?


Yeah, well, they do help most people quite a bit with ADHD, but yeah, sometimes you just got to give yourself the space to be like, yeah, I can have a day like this sometimes and it's all good.


A little bit.


Yeah, I mean, dex or amphetamine is I guess you can say speed, but, like, speed, I guess, on the street means so many different things. It used to be amphetamine like, whereas now it's a mixture of all sorts of things. And dextroenthetamine actually is just the if anyone knows much about chemistry, it's the mirror isotope of amphetamine, which is to say that molecularly all the same atoms are involved. It's the same shape, except that it's the mirror image of it. And they do have a pretty similar effect in certain ways on the way that we feel and stuff like that. But amphetamine has more of a body high feeling, and dextroenthetamine has more of a mental alertness feeling, but they are pretty similar in terms of the two main stimulant options. So that's one and Ritalin, which is methylphenidate, is what Ritalin is. That's the other one. And then there are long acting forms of either. So respectively, via vancing Concerta, while there's plenty of individual variations, so there are plenty of adults who do better with Ritalin versus dexteronephetamine. The research shows that it is more likely for adults to do better on Dexteronephetamine and kids to do better on Ritalin.


So I tend to like nerd out and read all about the studies and stuff like that before I was diagnosed, and then so I requested to start on dextroenthetamine. I have tried riddling down the track, but I prefer dextroentamine myself.


Yeah, they're both stimulants and they both work on the same two neurotransmitter. So the Norepinephrine and Dopamine, which are the two neurotransmitters that we know, all else being equal, are under regulated for people with ADHD. There are nonstimulant pharmaceuticals that are used as well. So, like strategy, for example, is it up regulates Norepinephrine but not dopamine, and that one works on a more gradual basis and some people slightly off label, but it's not that rare to use. We'll have something like Bupropion, which up regulates Norepinephrine and Dopamine, but it does it on a, you know, on a slower basis than just, like, the quick acting forms of, like, Dopamine and Ritalin. I've actually tried bupri on myself because I thought it might be interesting to have something that wasn't quite as fast acting, but I didn't much care for it. I had it like three times, and I was like, you know what? Not touching that again. Mess with my sleep and stuff like that, personally. But it's only of individual variation with all these things in terms of what works.


Yes or no? Particularly those I've seen who have the mixed presentation. So the hyperactivity as well do note that they feel a sense of calm when they take these stimulant medications, so that there is essentially the overall effect for them is less stimulation. The theory there is that they're focusing more intently and stuff like that. It's just that it's fulfilling some of that kind of external requirement for stimulation. And if that's already low enough to the point that you're seeking it out, then having a bit more activity going on in the brain can have that kind of sense of a calming effect. Now, like, most people when they take it who have ADHD will still kind of like if I take dexo amphetamine, it is similar in a sense, in a way to having coffee where I'm going to feel more wakeful, more wrapped up, that kind of thing. But I don't have negative side effects of it where people who don't have ADHD will often have, like particularly if they had a similar dosage to what you might become used to as somebody with ADHD, then that would likely be too much for them and that experience more of that kind of the negative side of it.


When you have a lot of dextroenthetamine, one is like you can kind of like clench your jaw a bit and stuff like that, because there's that sense of, like, overstimulation feel a bit jittery.


Yeah.


I cannot well, coffee coffee works in a totally different way. Like both coffee and the stimulants, like Dopamine and Ritalin will upregulate dopamine, but the way that they help you focus are completely different. So coffee doesn't have an impact on Norepinephrine, so that tends to be underregulated for people with ADHD. It actually increases focus by upregulating cortisol. And so if you've already got plenty of supply of cortisol but Norepinephrine is the one that's low, and then you take something that may not be problematic in that kind of sense.


Yeah, like not jumping around from task to task as much, which can give a feeling of restlessness for sure.


It's worth noting that with coffee and the caffeine in it, it impacts people's sleep more than they realize, even if they're able to get to sleep. It's worth noting the halflife of caffeine is 6 hours, which means that in twelve hours'time you're still going to have a quarter of the original dosage that you've had of coffee. So if you've had like a big triple latte, then you still got a quarter of that cup in your system 12 hours later, which might be when you're trying to wind down and go to sleep. And even when people do get to sleep with it, they will often actually wake earlier, so they sleep less time when they've had coffee. The primary difference between coffee and tea, by the way, is they both contain caffeine, but coffee also contains the agromide, which is the stimulant that's in chocolate and stuff like that. So it's an extra different stimulant as well, which is why there's like having a whole bunch of strong tea isn't the same as having coffee because coffee also contains that extra stimulant. Fun fact, theobromide is the thing in chocolate that dogs can't have because it just acts like a stimulant for them as well, but they can't get rid of it from their body, so they just have a massive high.


I don't know much about Thiene, but are you sure that's the term the.


There certainly are a couple of extra things that you get, particularly more so in green tea than you do, than you do in regular tea, that they can not necessarily counterbalance the stimulant and stop that from working. But there is like an overall kind of smoothing effect. I guess, in a sense, I forget the name of them, but it's one of the main reasons why for guys, testosterone is increased by a couple of the things that green tea has, which is why it's like a herbal remedy for low testosterone in guys. Don't worry, it's not going to impact it for girls, and it only corrects it when it's too low. You're going to say something more so.


I don't know about any research, but that doesn't mean that it's not there. It might be. I guess I've kind of gotten used to I can have coffee now, but historically it had a massive effect on me. If I had the tiniest bit of coffee, I didn't drink it for years and years and years until like three years ago, literally. So, like a decade of my adulthood, I intentionally stayed away from it because it would just like yeah, it would stay in my system, mess with my sleep and stuff like that.


I'm not aware of any evidence where caffeine in general is useful for people with ADHD. Like he might have just found that helps him in some way, like it can help with your focus in general but it's not working on the same neurotransmitter that norepinephrine that is under regulated for us. So it wouldn't make quite as much, I guess, kind of sense in that way to me that coffee would do the same thing but I mean, everyone's different. You find what works, I guess, as well. I better jump into the content though. Great conversation guys. Okay, so today is on anger and impulsive mistakes. So I'll just resize. There we are. So we'll go through relatively quickly because it'll be more of a reflection on the impulsiveness side. So the ADHD brain regarding impulsiveness, how to maintain peak performance, which relates to the diet and the sleep and the stuff like that, that we've talked about improving impulsiveness in a more direct fashion and then with the mindfulness meditation and any kind of like training for selfcontrol by utilizing selfcontrol, like delaying gratification, imposing structure on ourselves, all that kind of thing. And then how to compensate for relative weaknesses.


Just an interesting extra point. It's like once we've done all of these things still useful to recognize that it's probably not going to be our absolute strength to always not be impulsive, particularly if there's a lot of excitement going on or if your routines have fallen out and stuff like that. So it's just a quick conversation about pairing up with people who are good at the admin side to kind of counterbalance that, or even if you find that overspending, impulsively or something like that is an issue, than just making it less available or decreasing opportunity to do that, which frankly would be useful for many people with overspending. That's not just an ADHD thing, we'll just have a bit of a conversation there, then we'll talk about anger in a more detailed way. So ADHD and anger so how it particularly relates to us, but most of this stuff relates to everybody in some way when it comes to anger. So emotional dysregulation what anger primarily is, like why it's there, it's actual utility and understanding what types of things can make us angry as a way of like, you know, it gets reinforced over time and gaining awareness over that can allow us to have more control over situations where we're getting angry.


But it's actually an overlay of vulnerability or there's secondary gain, which is the idea that even if you're not intentionally trying to get something from, you know, showing anger to somebody who you're in an argument with or something like that if there's something like there's relief or like they back off or they leave you alone or whatever it is that there's some kind of like some positive that can come out of it and that can reinforce the feeling of anger coming up in similar situations, even if it's not the plan. And there is that secondary gain aspect that it can be difficult to, I guess, be honest with ourselves about that because we can, like, convince ourselves, like, well, you know, that's just something that I have no control over. But then we note there's like, well, I'm clearly getting this out of it. Could that be part of it? But I'll detail it'll make more sense in the context of the slide there. So did anybody try meditation over last week? Yeah, I was going to go through like, you know, just kind of checking what people's experiences are with it. If anyone has an interesting story of how they tried it and it did or didn't work or something like that, then we could do a bit of it.


But we did have a bit of conversation as well earlier, so I'm just aware of time. We'll just make it fairly brief. Does anybody have a good story?


Yeah, definitely. Like, in general, things are going to require less self control if they're more convenient to do. It's also something that.


Often calls me out for looking distracted.


Task to do, but also just in.


Yeah, definitely a bit of accountability. And also potentially like a waiter to get some brownie points because she knows about it. All about those brownie points never hurts. All right, so pomodoro time. The impulse of nested a little bit. So why do people with ADHD tend to be more impulsive than others in general? And all of this is a bit of a recap. So less activity in the interior cingulate cortex and dorsalateral prefrontal cortex. The interior cingulate cortex is related to, you know, slowing down the response. In situations where we assess, it to be important to have an overall kind of a considered approach and then that allows us time to utilize our dorsalidal prefrontal cortex to change what we're going to do in response to that situation. Because there's less of that in ADHD there's in a sense, just like there's less slowing down and having the reins to, I guess, to allow us to change the direction of what we want to do. And therefore a tendency for impulsiveness, also a tendency because of that to have a higher emotional volume than the average person because there's less inhibition, less kind of blocking of the direct emotional response.


Let's see, maintaining peak baseline brain performance and again, this is all reflection as well. Sorry, I'm just going to put my dog out because he's sorry, you couldn't say it was just off camera, but it was jumping on my lap. Yeah. So maintaining peak baseline performance, it's just about making the sacrifices required to sleep well. So we talked about, like, setting up the routines or sometimes it's like making the decision to stop what we're doing at the time that we might be enjoying or interested in and stuff like that. To go to sleep or having a cutoff for the time that we engage in novel stuff which might be less interesting, like watching reruns of stuff you've already seen or reading a book that you've already read or something like that. But doing stuff that you're willing to stop at any time is really important around that time that you want to get to sleep because of the fact that sleepiness comes in waves. So all of the things that you might shift, these are sacrifices often that you've got to kind of, like, see enough reason to make. And you might have to shuffle things around or decidedly do things in a different way or find different times that you can do stuff that you enjoy late at night so that you can still do those things that you enjoy.


But at other times it's all about sacrifice, I guess, in some sense, which is why so much of helping people with sleep is like a convincing that it's actually going to be worthwhile keeping your diet in check. Utilizing any amount of self control, even when it comes to like if you want to binge or you want to have junk food or something like that, even just delaying it, even if you're still going to do it, is utilizing self control in that moment. Therefore exercising and practicing it and then increasing the likelihood that you will act in accordance with what you actually would like to have done in the future because you'll have more access to selfcontrol through practicing it. Managing stress with exercise, fun, me time and social interaction. The less stressed we are, the more our resources can be dedicated to our control over things that we want to do. When you're really stressed with work and stuff like that, you're more likely to lose your temperate because there's less of those resources that are there because they're being used up with this kind of stress and excess cortisol and which also messes with sleep and so on, training to combat it.


And this relates to the stuff last week about mindfulness meditation which improves attention switching ability, impulse control and selective attention, placing it on what you want for more time and more intently. Mindfulness meditation increases the size of the interior cingulate cortex and general habits of yielding to impulses weaken these areas. And of course the flip side is true where the more of that delaying, as I was saying, that we do in life, the more imposed structure that we have, the more we're going to build up self control over time. So in short, practice discipline and you build it. And I've just got there over on the picture that you can also train the brain by practicing your music skills. Not all types if you're just like maybe you know how to play the guitar and you just pick it up and kind of run whatever comes to mind. Not a whole lot of self control necessarily required for that, but doing scales or doing something consistent that's going to build your skills in that it's a great way to improve selfcontrol. It's actually quite a bit of research on young kids getting involved in music, having all sorts of benefits when it comes to lifelong success in jobs and all sorts of stuff which in all likelihood is largely related to the self control that they build through doing that that gets applied naturally to everything else in their life.


Compensating for the remaining weak point. So everybody has their strengths and weaknesses. And we know as people with ADHD that relative to the average person we have a set of these that include impulsiveness. ADHD tend to be creative and passionate and exciting but impulsiveness includes a tendency to overspend, over, invest in ideas without considering the downsides, take risks and many other full steamer head pitfalls if we set up our environment to rein ourselves in. Like, for example, when it comes to spending, keeping money in a separate savings account, especially when on a holiday or gift shopping. Or when you know that in that situation, in the past, you've had a tendency to overspend setting up multiple bank accounts so that you've only got a certain amount in your fund account, so to speak. And maybe there's a savings account that holds money that you don't need to be available on a regular basis and you don't have a card for that. You've got to actually transfer it. So there's an extra you're forced to slow down and think about whether it's actually really worth it to you by having that extra step involved. The more we make something inconvenient that we would have an impulsive desire to do, the less selfcontrol is actually required to not do that thing and vice versa.


And even partnering with. People that you know are better at administration, organization, even if you think they are boring. Which we may have a tendency to be more interested in other people who are similar to us and like novelty and all that. Kind of stuff and think that the people who are really good at the flip side, the admin and stuff like that, but have a tendency, perhaps to have, like an aversion to risk more than we have or, like that they don't engage in as many creative pursuits or something like that that were less interested in those, we might have a tendency to spend less of our time with them. But when it comes to getting stuff done, those people are, you know, they're going to find the things that we find difficult, easy, and vice versa. I think that I've mentioned in the past that when they've studied neurodiverse teams as in teams that include people with ADHD versus teams that don't, that there is a huge benefit several times. So I think four to five times more productivity in some types of teams that include neurodivergence with either ADHD or ASD. And this is because if they're able to set the team up in such a way that people do what they're best at then having that neurodivergence is going to increase the overall skill set that the team has.


And this works in the other direction as well. If you have ten people with ADHD and they're all coming up with tons of ideas and stuff like that, but nobody is saying that's a stupid idea, we shouldn't do that. Or keeping the ship going over time, then maybe you set up a whole bunch of stuff or you change direction too often. But we need a bit of both. And there's a video just on this next slide. I realized that Jordan Peterson is known for some political stuff but this has really nothing to do with that. He's just making a point in an interview with somebody about setting yourself up and he's talking about it from the point of view of the entrepreneur types versus admin types. But you can basically just substitute entrepreneur types of people with ADHD and he'll be talking about pretty much the exact same thing. I'll just make it so that you guys can see this properly.


Right?


Okay, back in, guys. I saw a few comments there on the political side.


Wasn'T intended without getting into any kind of stuff there, because that can be it's always good to expose yourself to well presented ideas that you don't agree with. Right? Just to kind of balance out the senses. No, I know. Let's see if I can get this to go full screen again. What do people think about the point that he was making anyway?


Yeah, well, I mean, just a note of like, the importance to make sure that we do pair ourselves up with people who hold the strengths that we don't and vice versa, so that we can combine those together. For example, I made the slides for this group and present them, but if I didn't have someone like Cass who could just send out the emails on a regular basis and all that kind of stuff, then I don't think that I would be able to keep the ship running for a very long time. It's like more important for us if Admin skills aren't our strength to be friends with the guys who are really good at it so that we can get the advantage of that and at the same time provide the advantage of what we are good at. Two teams.


All right, guys, do you guys want to have a quick break, grab glass, water or anything like that? Just before we jump into the next.


Still ask me questions.


Yeah, I guess it is in a sense. Also, it can be tough to find people who are really good at the admin side, who also really value the other side of kind of creative ideas and thinking in that kind of way. But at least we can do our side, which is to value and show those people that we value their strengths rather than just being like, you know, I guess focusing on the aspect of lack of intrigue or novelty or something like that.


Yeah. I'm not sure whether I've mentioned in the past, but when it comes to filtering what you say before you say it, when I was a little kid, I didn't know that I had ADHD, but clearly exhibited the characteristics. And I got told so many times by my mom and older brother, think before you talk, think before you talk. That ended up being this mantra. And I went in the other direction where I'd have a tendency to really consider what I say before I say it, but to an extent that it was then worth, once I realized that, to actually train out of it a bit, to balance it out. Because if you're having a conversation with somebody that's like, you know, emotionally important, but you filtering what you're saying, you know, too much. And that can lead to a bit of mistrust of like, why does he have that need to really kind of consider before he says anything, what's he trying to hide? And that wasn't actually the case. But yeah, it's important to have the mid ground in so many of these things. And you can definitely like, I've come across clients who are extremely organized, who have ADHD, and it's because they're like it's driven by the fear of like, well, if I let anything slip, then everything's going to fall apart.


So I have to keep everything in line. It doesn't always happen, but yeah, people will often develop some sort of like heavy compensation that even overbalances.


I mean, perhaps. I guess we don't really know what exactly is happening on it on a chemical level necessarily, but I think it's more like they're not necessarily amazing at it. They have to try really hard, but it's because they're really afraid of what the result would be and in a sense it can work for them, but it's like, it's so much effort to be in that way at the same time. Like you build self control by enacting self control so they would get better at that versus the same person not doing it. But it's not like it's coming natural to them because of that fear. It's just that fear is increasing the sense of importance and then they're like really paying attention to things and planning ahead and forcing themselves to kind of do things ahead of time so that they don't fall apart down the track.


Yeah, I guess we as people with ADHD often would have the tendency to it's hard to get revved up about things if we can convince ourselves that it's not important. So like, if you've got that clear pressure of like everything's important, then you don't have that issue. But there's just a toll that that takes, I guess, as well. All right, next pomodoro set. Pomodoro time. All right, so anger. I won't play this video, but if anyone's interested will be in the slides and everything like that. This is our channel. How to ADHD? And she's just talking about the tendency for people with ADHD to have a higher emotional volume, whether it's happiness, sadness, temper, or anything like that. And that relates to less of that inhibition like I was talking about earlier. And we can feel the emotions as bigger. So there's a sense of like I guess it's the extra challenge of being in control of these things doesn't mean it's impossible, but it means all else being equal is kind of an extra challenge because the emotions have more relative volume because they're not being inhibited as much in general. So I just got there.


It's common for people with ADHD to struggle with controlling anger. Not everybody with ADHD will have difficulty with anger at all. But it's like, it's kind of like with alcohol that decreases your inhibition, right? That if people have a tendency to be aggressive but they're able to stop themselves from doing that in daily life and then they drink, then they're more likely when they're drunk to express anger. But if they don't have that, that they're inhibiting anyway, then that's not going to be the way that their lower inhibitions when they're drinking is going to manifest. And likewise when it comes to ADHD, not necessarily an issue, but because the impulsiveness is there that there's more of a tendency that people with ADHD have all equal to express anger if it is there, or frustration when it is there. And of course it's worse when you're stressed and can be managed with the methods related to impulsiveness like we talked about. But managing stress, deciding what we do when we are already stressed, like potentially not doing things that are going to lead to popping the lid, so to speak, can all be important factors to reduce it as well.


What is anger primarily? So when we're angry, we almost always think things are unfair or should be different and often about other people or the situation. Like this should be the way, this shouldn't be the way they're doing a bad thing, they're wronging me, they're wronging others, that kind of thing. These are the thoughts that we associate with anger. And when I'm talking about anger itself of the feeling that doesn't have to be paired with the expression of anger or rage, it is actually related to these types of thoughts and the feeling that you have internally even if nobody knows that you're angry. Dealing with anger on the kind of primary level like we'll talk about today is really important when it comes to like long term cardiovascular health, the one of the highest risk factors for cardiovascular issues. So like having a blockage in any part of our body. So like a heart attack, being in the heart, pulmonary embolism in the lung, stroke in the brain, you know, any of these things, they're more likely when we have a baseline of getting angry even if we're not expressing it. And particularly when you stay angry for a long time, you're kind of ruminating about things because what happens to our body when we get angry like that is if you maybe remember from school or something like that, talking about the duality of the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system.


And so when we get revved up, the sympathetic nervous system has more relative activation and this does a whole bunch of different things that would be useful if we were running for our life, fighting for our life, that kind of fight, flight free situation. But when we're just getting revved up on an internal basis, often, and those things are happening that it's problematic, it decreases the amount of resources that we're getting to our organs, like our stomach and our brain. Which is why people with chronic anger and anxiety and whatnot often have stomach issues because they're not getting enough resources there as well. And as I mentioned in the past, that when we're not getting a lot of resources to our brain, the first part of our brain that is going to miss out is going to be the prefrontal cortex. And particularly those parts that we talked about, the dosulight of prefrontal cortex and interior cingulate cortex, these are expensive to run in terms of just resources in the body, the glycogen, the oxygen required to run it. And we don't die if they don't get enough resources like we do with many other parts of our brain.


So it's a good trade off, I guess, for our system to shut those things down. But it means that when we get angry, our ability to filter ourselves and do something differently and handle impulsiveness decreases over time, which is why I talk about in a couple of slides. I think that spotting the early warning signs so that you can deal with the anger before you get too angry is also a really important thing because you have more control over that time. In jumping back to the cardiovascular health, what happens is because it's trying to deliver more of the resources around the body and particularly to the big muscles in the arms and legs so that we could fight around for our life. And it's still doing that in a moderate way when we're just angry internally without actually showing an expression of anger. So it's increasing the blood pressure through that. But because if you were running for your life or you're fighting for your life, you have a tendency potentially to get a cut. You can't just have high blood pressure without having any other correction or that's just going to mean bleeding out, like just too much bleeding, right?


So it also increases the thickness and stickiness of the blood, increases the clotting factor. And when that happens over time so there are two things so related to high blood pressure. When that happens too much, the blood vessels have to protect themselves so that they don't perforate, so that they don't burst or anything like that. And they actually do that by forming tata. So when you think of a plaque in the blood vessels that will narrow the blood vessels over time, this isn't a dietary problem and it's not related to too much cholesterol was kind of like falsely stated back in the propagated thereafter for many decades. But it's actually this is a protective response that our body will intentionally do to protect itself from perforating in the presence of too high blood pressure. And of course that means that the amount of force required to pump the blood around our body over time actually increases because a narrower straw requires more force for the same flow. Right now, also because it's increasing the clotting factor, then we have a tendency then to form blockages. And those blockages result in those things that I was talking about, heart attack polynomials, all, that kind of thing.


And therefore, like I used to work for community chronic conditions in the mental health area up in Queensland. And part of what I do every couple of weeks would be to give a talk to people who had recently had a heart attack because they had basically have a doctor giving their part of it, a nurse, a dietitian, and me, a psychologist, giving that side of things and just kind of giving them an overall bunch of information over a couple of days. And in that talk, of course, I'd offer them services to them that are available free. Find me a person in that room who doesn't have either chronic anger over time, whether they recognize it or not, or anxiety where they're getting revved up over time and they're staying revved up. So, just worth noting, I guess, the other advantage of being in control of oranga quick question.


Problematic because it's not necessarily like even now well known by all GPS. That being said, there are some types of cholesterols that are problematic in other ways, but it is not because it causes the heart issues. So when we have scarring formed around our fat cells as we're getting an insulin response too often over time. And what that does is convert all of the sugar in our blood to adapt tissue or fat pushes into the fat cells. And if that happens too often because you get that crash and then you go and eat something sweet to kind of get the quick pick up and it does the same thing over and over, then it's actually, it causes scar tissue around there. And one of the repairing factors actually is cholesterol. At the same time, that plaque, to form that plaque, it requires cholesterol. And because of that we're going to have it stored up in the body. So they measure it as like, yep, there's higher cholesterol. And they did studies in the past where they saw that there's a correlation of the amount of cholesterol stored in the body and heart disease and stuff like that.


And then they assumed causation from that, they assumed that the cholesterol and the dietary cholesterol was actually causing it. They've later found out that that was incorrect.


Yeah. So things like eggs that are particularly the yolk is quite high in cholesterol. There used to be this fat of, like, have the egg whites and not the egg yolks because then you won't have the high cholesterol and don't eat the fat and meat and stuff like that. And that's no longer considered to be true. Those things are high in cholesterol, but that's not problematic for us at all. In fact, one of the key. So cholesterol is involved in a lot of different important chemical reactions that the body requires to keep on functioning, including the building of dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine, by the way. So not getting enough of those, which probably get enough of them, unless you're really leaning into a vegan diet and like, avoiding cholesterol as much as possible, that kind of thing. But that doesn't help people in the way that they used to think it does. Thank you.


So questioning the basis for our anger, particularly once we're already angry, can feel wrong, like letting a threat crawl into your bed. And I phrase it in that way, I guess, to illustrate this idea that because it is primarily to protect ourselves from being wronged or hurt, that we're going to be more defensive and less trusting at that time. There are actually so, like, that's kind of the negative side of it, and it maintains itself. It's hard to, like, you know, make ourselves think about, like, the flip side of what we're thinking when we're angry. Like, well, actually, the person may have had good reasons for doing whatever they did. Let's say that somebody, like, drives I'm driving my car, somebody drives in front of me, and then they slow down and I can't pass them. And it's annoying because I want to get where I want to get, and they're slowing me down. And for me to pull myself back from thinking, like, oh, they're messing it up for the rest of us, they're causing problems, they're being inconsiderate, all that kind of stuff, and be like, well, hold on a second. Maybe they could be in a real rush.


I'm probably not. Like, I'm not going to die if I get there 30 seconds later. Jenga is not serving me well in the sense that I'm just stirring myself up. Like all this kind of stuff. There's a block to thinking those things that can be like it's almost like lifting a weight off because we have a tendency to be less trusting of these kinds of positive thoughts when we're angry, so that we're not prevented from being assertive when we need to be. So. Like the utility of the anger and the reason why it's there primarily apart from like, you know, if you think of tribal days, like disputes where you need to defend yourself in a physical way. Also, just like, you imagine that people are mistreating you in a way that you could do something about if you said something like spoke up, stood up for yourself, but without the end, you might have a tendency to be like no, it's fine, I won't say anything. But then you continue to get rolled over time, people even perhaps lose respect for you, whatever it is, because they feel like they can walk all over you and they're not going to be challenged in that the anger, it increases the sense of how capable you are.


So people rate how capable they are when they're angry. As higher, they feel more powerful, they feel stronger. And because there's a tendency to also focus on the unfairness that other people are causing to us and to do something about that, then in some situations it can be very useful to stand up for yourself, to be more assertive and stuff like that. It's not just paired with rage. And I wanted to make that point because there's so much shame that people have about anger where they're like, well, I don't want to even allow myself to think that anger is a part of me, I don't want to ever get angry, that kind of thing. It's like, well, if it wasn't serving some adaptive purpose over time, anger wouldn't be a part of our repertoire. And it is. And you can see the situations that people would be disadvantaged in if they didn't have a moderate amount of anger in order to make them stand up for themselves. What I'm focusing on primarily today in terms of the understanding of it, is where we can convince ourselves that we should be angry in order to not feel vulnerable or in order to serve some other purpose for ourselves.


Oftentimes if we feel overwhelmed, we feel like nothing, don't have enough resources to do anything differently. And there's a sense of like, kind of relief if we just let ourselves show the anger. This is about not taking personal responsibility. Like the guy in the picture getting angry at his computer which primarily just does what it does. It has consistent functions based on input. But you can get frustrated at a table that you stubbed your toe on and you stub your toe on it because you're rushing and not paying attention on the table's fault it stayed still. But of course, the more overwhelmed we are, the more stressed and everything like that, the more tenants we have to act with anger. And it can make us feel better about ourselves because we're not blaming ourselves and taking responsibility in that way and feeling vulnerable, feeling incapable. We're externalizing that and blaming something else or someone else. So this happens most when we're overwhelmed, it's more likely when we're rushed or stressed or already upset. And we may develop a pattern of showing anger loud and early when we're afraid to signal that we're scary, right? So if you think of, like, the person who they get revved up and get in a fight at the pub often, and there they would literally feel anger earlier on because when there's a sense that there's a physical threat, they could get hurt, and then they feel angry, they feel less vulnerable at that time, and then there's a pattern of reinforcement.


It's like, oh, in this situation where I felt threatened and this doesn't need to be logically thought out that our brain is going to react to behavioral reinforcement regardless of conscious awareness. So if we're feeling vulnerable, there's a sense of threat and then we get angry and then there's a sense of relief because we feel more capable, we feel less exposed, less vulnerable, then that can get reinforced over time and get a faster and more pronounced overlay effect that we're not even aware of. And to the point that people don't get the sense that it comes from vulnerability at all because they so quickly responsibly react with anger, they think that that's the primary and it's actually vulnerability in that case. So anger and vulnerability is a few more points there. So anger can make us feel temporarily strong, as I pointed out. So when we're truly vulnerable in a way that we cannot change and that can be when we mess up big at work and being like, well, it's their fault, they put me in this situation, that kind of thing. Or also if we're failing at something and getting angry and being like, well, this assignment stupid, or, you know, like something about the situation that we can get angry at that defers the blame from us also.


And the reason why I've got that picture of like being in a hospital, perhaps you've been told that you are vulnerable, you are sick, you need their help, but they're rushed like the doctors rush, you don't get a lot of time with them. You don't understand what you feel like you need to understand people can get angry in that situation, really. And it really gets in the way of them getting the help that they need because they just want to push away and reject the people who are trying to help them because they're angry with them and getting like, just being like, well, the doctor's crap, they don't care, DA DA DA. Like all of these kind of blame like thoughts can be problematic because they lead people away from that help. So in this case, anger is reinforced by the feeling of relief upon masking vulnerability. As I was talking about on the last slide, vulnerabilities are worse or a more unpleasant feeling than anger. And unfortunately it causes two problems which are that we can push people away that are wanting to help us, as I said. And our avoidance of feeling, of allowing ourselves to feel the vulnerability disabilituates us or gets us to be not used to the feeling of vulnerability.


And it decreases our ability to handle that vulnerability and to calm down, to feel okay about it on our own accord without the use of anger. And where anger is often overlaying vulnerability, we need to train ourselves to remove that blanket and accept it over time and get used to that vulnerability so it's not required, which is that kind of two step approach. And once we're able to identify that our anger is misplaced, we can practice dealing with the vulnerability and it does get easier as we do. So it can just take a bit of time, particularly if it's a really strong pattern. All right, that was a lot. Does anybody have any questions about anything in that section?


I wondered whether this can translate into anger towards yourself or if it's kind.


To things outside of you. I guess it depends on exactly how you conceptualize anger and who you ask. What I'm talking about here does tend to be more about the unfairness or the mistreatment from others on us. Interestingly. Freud's idea of depression was anger turned inward and oftentimes it does actually happen over time. I can think of a client who I used to work with who he talked about being really wronged and was really angry at the bank to his perception, like screwing him out of a bunch of money with some sort of property land dispute, something like that. And it was years later he wasn't able to do anything that was going to fight against the bank or anything like that. The only person who was impacting was him. But then because he was angry at the bank and then other people and stuff like that, he closes down as well. He doesn't want to go out and see people and stuff like that. And there's this rumination of how angry he is and those things lead to depression. So the primary reason for which I was seeing him was depression and pretty severe depression that we could only alleviate by relinquishing, by letting go of that anger in the first place and then building back up the lifestyle required.


Yeah, rolling stone.


Yeah. So, like, a couple of things that we have gone over, I guess, like prevention is better than a cure. So if we are managing our stress, doing those things, like having fun, having me time, socializing spotting when we're feeling overwhelmed and there's too much stress and we've got to, like, give ourselves a good break or whatever, it is, you know, good diet, good sleep. All of this stuff is going to make us more robust. Like less likely to get angry in an uncontrollable way down the track. Also, the greater our self control is, the greater our ability to see it in a different way and to empathize before we get too angry and therefore not have the anger ramp up in the same way. And part of that is also spotting because it relates to this next slide that I'll detail, is about spotting the early warning signs so that you're getting in as early as you can because there's more that you can do before you don't have a lot of blood going to your brain. And then your ability to kind of diffuse that decreases as you get toward that kind of peak.


So what we talk about, because it just happens to be related to this slide, if you look at that picture there. So with the latter, when I do this with kids and I think it's better imagery, I would like draw a volcano. And it's the idea of, like, that's when you're absolutely you've lost your temporar at that point, probably the best thing that you're going to have the control to do is just to exit from the situation. But then if we can build up the knowledge of, like, I'm getting a bit frustrated, I'm getting a bit annoyed these earlier stages, and I'll talk about how that's done in a moment. Then when we're just a little bit frustrated, then it can be like doing diaphragmatic breathing, that kind of empathy, like, as in perspective taking, thinking about how we might, if we were the other person, have decided to do the thing that we felt wronged by at that early stage. If we can do that, like, in the sense that we really empathize with them and understand that, yeah, if I was just like them in this situation, I would probably do that too.


That diffuses the anger. And then a little bit higher up, it might be like so some diaphragmatic breathing, which you need to train yourself to be able to do while you're calm, because it's easier to train yourself to do while you're calm. This is at belly breathing. There's a video of diaphragmatic breathing on my YouTube channel if you're interested in learning about that. But there's also a whole bunch where people are demonstrating how to do it. And if you've done like singing or anything like that, then you probably find that easy because you've already learned how to control and utilize your diaphragm. If you do that because your lungs don't have like we don't have enough control over our lungs with the ancillary muscles around our chest and upper back to hold like a steady note. So you have to sing with your diaphragm, then you get used to that. Diaphragmatic breathing is a really useful way of decreasing arousal in general and related to anger because it actually directly contacts what's called the vagal nerve, which runs down our spinal cord. And when the vagal nerve is activated, that switches us from sympathetic to parasympathetic arousal mode and we calm down.


And that allows us to then do something different once we're more calm. Even the slow breathing and deep breathing, stuff like that, that people do, which is a simpler method, it's not quite as effective as diaphragmatic breathing, but these are also ways to d, arouse distraction, exiting the situation, all that kind of stuff. But it's like spotting at what stage, like of what stage of getting annoyed can we do X and at what stage can we do these set of things, and then when are we so angry that we pretty well should just exit the situation? So it's not like one simple answer, I guess. But you know, from the prevention side to the training side, to the managing our stress, to the spotting early warning signs, and then there are strategies within that several layers, super easy.


Absolutely. Whenever I'm working with somebody for whom that's true. So, like, they might have a tendency either because they're very agreeable or they're not kind of connecting the dots of if I allow myself to get annoyed like this, then later on I'm probably going to act in a way that I'm not happy with that kind of thing. Then it does come down to building that awareness and then doing the assertiveness training. The way that Yong put it, which I think makes a lot of sense, is shadow integration. It's the realization that anger, our shadow, something that we don't necessarily like about ourselves, perhaps is actually a part of us. And if we don't recognize that and then make sure that we're assertive early because that is going to come out in an uncontrolled way, if we don't, then that's exactly what happens. When I used to work with Young kids, which also meant working a lot with their parents around boundary setting. Oftentimes the reason why they're not doing the boundary setting is because that shadow integration hasn't occurred. It's like they don't want to be the bad guy, so then they don't want to enforce these rules and give them a timeout and stuff like that.


But that means that they have to, several times a day, ask their kid to do something a million times. And the impact of that down the line is oftentimes that they will lose their temper in an underdoing wages, like, shout at them, that kind of thing, and the kid won't have a sense of where that came from. But even if it doesn't get to that point, it still comes out, and you're less excited about the thing that they're showing you because you're kind of pissed off at them, even though you allowed them through not setting those boundaries to continue to do the things that actually led to you getting annoyed. So then it's a matter of connecting those dots and being like, right, this is going to be better for them. And that kind of thing happens in all sorts of different situations.


Yeah.


Yeah.


Being assertive early on so that you don't get to the point where it's just like, you know what? I've just done this for you. It comes out that uncontrolled way. Don't allow yourself to get to that point where it becomes likely. Absolutely. Just a note on how to spot these early warning signs. So this is something, I guess, as a practice you can do for yourself. It's something that I would do with a client as well, where, like, when we're populating the different stages of how angry they are, I'll go through the types of things that they're feeling at different stages. And people describe that in different way. It might be like, yeah, I was just a bit peeped. I was just a bit irritated, and then I was really annoyed, then I was furious and DA DA DA. So you've got some sort of staging there. You're also thinking about, like, when did these thoughts of unfairness and the shoulds and shouldn'ts and stuff like that start to come up? Because that might be a reasonably early stage as well. Even noting, like, let's say because I'll go through a specific example with somebody which could be, like, maybe a certain argument they had with their partner or their kid, like they lost their temper at their kid or something like that, that would be like, okay, so what time of day did that happen?


What were you doing earlier that day? And, you know, oftentimes because I'll be like, yeah, just kind of like it was like a switch. It went zero to 100. But then when we rewind it's, like, oftentimes, like, had a bad day or, you know, hadn't eaten a bit, you know, you were annoyed about something else that wasn't related to it. Like, we're finding all of those events that might have led up to the susceptibility of it, where even at those early stages, you'd be like, well, maybe I don't want to have this battle or argument or whatever it is when I'm already, like, at my kind of least controlled stage because I've just had a really stressful day and stuff like that. Going through the physiological changes that people notice in their body, like when they notice their heart rate or like maybe sweating of their hands or they feel hot, people have noted as well, like, you know, they kind of feel like a pressure in their legs or their body to move or something like that. These are different ways also to know when did that happen? What were those different stages? Just to give us more of an anchor for them of, like, they can spot that in the future and think, oh, is that a sign that I'm getting angry?


So just more things that they can spot that are going to build their awareness and the behavioral changes. And many of these people do when they feel angry and don't actually realize that they're even doing it. So, like, our voice tends to get deeper and louder and we have a tendency to stand larger or to stand closer, almost like standing over people in a more intimidating fashion, of course, browning and stuff like that. But it's going through with them at those different stages who have identified with those other things that are going on. What do you notice that you do differently or that you might do differently? And I'll ask these examples that I know are pretty common characteristics of anger. And then once we've got that so we've got like a whole bunch of things related to the behavior, physiological changes, thoughts and emotions all the way up the ladder. Then we can draw the line and say okay, so this is when and I'll ask the person when do you think under which you've still got enough control because you're only a little bit annoyed to do some perspective taking and stuff like that versus the breathing techniques versus exiting the situation and stuff like that?


We'll kind of draw those lines, put a strategy to each of those and then they've got more awareness over spotting it earlier. So therefore they've got more options and then they've got some specific options that they know work in general for people to come down. Could people manipulate each other without fully knowing it? This is a secondary gain stuff. Often externalized behavior serve functions for us without our full awareness. You may have noticed that people, for example, receive compassion or are let off the hook when they cry. So not related to anger. As a different example, most people say crying is involuntary. But the sound and even the chemistry of tears differ from signal based crying. You know what you would do only when you're around other people versus crying when it is legitimately about despair and sadness. Like when people are legitimately sad and that's the reason for which they're crying. It has nothing to do with signal. They have a much more protein in their tears. It's that kind of like a milky color, it's thicker versus the more water salinebased tears that they have when they're just signal crying. And you can tell if you think of maybe kids are a good example where you hear them from the other room and you know, whether they're just banging on or whether there's like maybe they're banging on for a while and then they actually get hurt immediately, you know, and then you go and rush into that room because it's completely different sound with different associations for you.


You know what the real crying is that you've got to respond to. Now, few people will blatantly fake cry to make their loved ones do what they want. But a deep honest look inward reveals that they desired x and cried to achieve it. So, for example, if you're having an argument with somebody and like, some people will cry very often in their arguments with their spouse and very early and they know that encourages compassion from their partner, maybe stops their partner from pushing the envelope further, maybe shuts down the partner's position so that they can feel that they're right, that kind of thing. And these can be all quite relieving. They don't need to actually be fake crying like I said, so that these things will happen. But if they've had times in the past of they cry and then there's relief because of something like that happening, then it's going to get reinforced in situations like that to cry and even to feel that it is actually out of their control. Which is why building insight and that recognition that it's not completely out of your control, there is something that you're actually getting from it.


It is related to reinforcement, can allow people just through that insight to be able to pull back on it and decide what they actually would like to do and whether they want that to have an impact over the arguments that they have, for example, or something like that.


Yeah, there's definitely a gender bias. Women are more likely to express their emotions in that way sometimes positively and very usefully. Women are also like they're better at relying on friends to give them support because particularly in like western culture, men have a tendency to like, you know, pretend that everything's okay when it's not, which is kind of a problem when it comes to going and seeking help even like therapy or whatever it is. Both men and women do this kind of stuff to some extent and you know, it's in different ways and stuff like that. But, yeah, there's definitely a gender bias in terms of how much, say, crying might be utilized, whereas and I'll talk about anger and rage on the next slide, which is also related to secondary gain, which might be more. Of a manifestation that a guy in Western society might allow themselves to do because they feel that that's what a man knows or whatever it is, you know? So anger and secondary game. So anger may serve to make you heard or silence others or because you want to win or just feel overwhelmed. You may punish people for upsetting you by blocking them out, giving them the cold shoulder or by making them afraid.


So ways that this pick this up in people when it comes to say, the cold shoulder. Like it is a good idea for couples to have like an agreed upon stopping point when either of them are too angry to legitimately get somewhere constructive with a conversation. Right, but oftentimes that can be used as an excuse when they're angry at them. Later they have calmed down, they could have the conversation, they could reengage with them, but they want to punish their partner who they know like is waiting for them to re engage again and they leave it going on longer where they're giving them the cold shoulder as a punishment. And that kind of anger can be problematic, of course. I can think of a couple that comes to mind now who were both doing that to one another. And we were able to identify that there was that punishment aspect and then once that was on the table so that awareness was there, then they were able to spot it, do it less, make it so that arguments don't last longer, because they weren't okay with punishing their partner in that way. Once they were fully aware of it, it was something that they were allowing themselves to do.


Telling themselves the excuse that it's just that they needed to calm down for all of that time when it wasn't really the case. And making somebody afraid with rage. Yes, of course, that can be. Like in the moment. Trying to make them afraid, that thing. But when it comes to the secondary gain, this can be like, let's say you have an argument with somebody and then you go to the other room and you slam a cupboard or something like that, and, you know that they're within earshot, right? And having a conversation with that couple be like, okay, so how are you feeling at that time to the person who slammed the cupboard and DA DA DA DA. Generally, they start off not having awareness that that was in any way meant to intimidate or make their partner feel bad, but it did. And there was that note of like, that was something they allowed themselves to do under the guise that it wasn't anything to do with punishment and that they were in the other room. So it wasn't rage at them or anything like that, but it actually was designed to punish them. Bringing that awareness again can diffuse that, I'll admit, that I can think of in the past like a place where I lived with housemates, with like a two story Queenslander, like all Queenslander kind of place.


We had a boxing bag under there, under the house. And when I think back to that, when I'd have an argument with one of my housemates, I wouldn't express rage to them, yell or anything like that, but I would go down and I kick the bag and I knew that's going to rumble the house. They know that that's there. And I guess it's a sense of like, well, they would feel bad knowing that it was upsetting in that kind of way and that's like, there's a punishment aspect of that. And through noting that now, I wouldn't do that, but at that time, I was able to convince myself that it was fine. I wasn't doing it to cause any difference to them. But I think underneath it all, there was a behavioral reinforcement.


It can, but again, when people do these things, they're not necessarily aware of it. I guess when you say sneaky, there's a sense of like you can decidedly show anger in a way that there's plausible deniability, I guess, of whether you think it's going to impact them and that's that kind of manipulative side. But you can also be doing similar things like that just because they've been behaviorally reinforced and not actually be deliberately doing it to harm or punish them in any way. So rage may even scare people from the other yeah. So I think all that was covered in the longest story. Does anybody have any questions about any of that stuff? Or maybe did anybody hear that? And it's just like, no way. No, I don't think so. I don't do that at all.


No, we talked a bit about that earlier. When it comes to overwhelm and vulnerability and stuff like that, that's not related necessarily to secondary gain, but noting that, for example, if I'm in a rush, I'm running late, and then say I stub my toe like I mentioned earlier, and I'm, like, getting mad at, like, let's say you've got to do some university assignment and being like, this is so stupid, when actually it's because you feel vulnerable. That it's like, why can't I do this thing? And that's really upsetting and frustrating and it feels better to convince yourself that it's them. So the insight can help there. And also even just spotting like, okay, hold on, I'm just losing the plot here. Time to go and have a walk or grab a glass of water or something like that. Like one of those methods you can enact when you spot that it's not actually angle with a utility, it's only causing you problems.


Yeah. An aspect of CBT, if anyone has done it, you may have come across cognitive restructuring or restructuring of your thoughts in some fashion. And there's two ways to look at that, one of which being how accurate is the idea and the other one related to how useful is the idea versus what are the problems that it was causing. And it's that latter one that we tend to focus on when it comes to anger. If doing that kind of cognitive restructuring because it may not be inaccurate that such and such wrong view or that we don't have great choices when it comes to governments that are likely to be elected with a double bind situation where both liberal and labor agree on 99% of the things that they do. For example, just saying. But we can still look at the utility through that awareness of like, okay, what the big overall kind of issues that this is causing me over time? Who else is impacted by this? Is any positive coming from it can help to just like, you know, I guess cut out the notion that you have to be angry, which when we are angry, there often is that sense of like kind of really clinging to it.


Like, I've got to be angry or somebody's going to get away with it and say, well, they're not getting away with it, but doesn't mean that it's necessarily easy to do. All right, and sorry guys, we are a little bit overtime, but hopefully that's okay. So before next session, I just asked write down and consider a couple of questions. Or you could just grab the slide or take a screenshot. Do you usually get angry only when in a rush or already worn down? Like related to that sense of overwhelmed or wanting to externalize the blame on someone or something else rather than yourself? Are you getting angry at objects to avoid owning your error? Have you experienced getting angry to avoid feeling vulnerable? That sense of like, I could be harmed, I am, you know, like exposed in some way here, but, you know, getting angry and therefore feeling stronger and feeling more okay with it. Might there be a secondary gain from your display of anger in X, Y or Z situation? Does anybody have any questions before we finished up today?


When we feel intuition about something, feeling safe or feeling right, or when we describe things like, my instincts led me there. This is us being able to keep an open ear to the elephant. Kind of matches pretty well with the metaphor of mindfulness meditation with my heart of Buddhism that we were talking about last time with, like sorry, the time before last, session before last, with the elephant as the emotional side, because that's essentially exactly what we've got here. And then the writer as this is the prefrontal cortex. This is, you know, we could call it like the seat of reasoning, where we're using linguistic, philosophical reasoning to figure out what we want to do, and then we kind of impose that on ourselves. Right? The cognitive side of the thinking side of CBT is essentially driven by the way, from Stoicism ism and many other philosophies like that. Staucism was a Russian one, where it's basically the primary idea was to live based on your reason as much as possible, and therefore to strengthen your self control by imposing your reason on yourself. Now, it's not the beall and end all, but you can see how that has utility in particular ways by building up self control.


And it certainly lends itself to the types of things that we've talked about up until this point. The elephant and the writer metaphor that he discusses is very much about it's just a bit more of an understanding about the way that our mind works so that we don't make the kind of the mistakes of being like okay, so I'm just a completely rational being. So any deviation from that is a mistake and I should try to snuff that out. It's like we're 90% irrational. We need to factor that in. Being totally rational doesn't necessarily include motivation to do anything. I know that's a pretty kind of philosophical point there but we'll discuss it as a group as way through. Then we're going to go and we'll chat about a couple of general ideas, like Wise Mind, which is an idea from dialogue called Behavioral Therapy, of essentially of taking wisdom from both your emotional drive or instinct or intuition, as you may call it, and your rational ideals and combine them together so that we're not dismissing either side. We're holistically taking in our own values and not limiting that just to the values that we might write on a piece of paper.


Then we'll talk about the various core beliefs that are likely to occur or various negative core beliefs that are likely to occur with trauma related to failure, peoplepleasing underlining standards and rejection. And we'll talk about some insights and solutions regarding each of those areas, including then right at the end, just some therapeutic options to help decrease the disproportional emotional reaction that can occur when we have these kind of core beliefs. Erroneously there about failure or any one of these things. Basically noting that there's plenty that we can do as an individual to decrease or to get rid of the problems that may be there from any kind of past form depending on the extent of it, but where it's really significant. And it can help to have a second person, to have a therapist who actually go through. So I'll do my best to explain what that kind of distinction is that people can individually make for themselves. Just a reflection on anger from last week. Raise your hands if there were points last week that you thought were kind of bollocks like were there parts that you kind of so I put on my hand and thought that I was doing a gesture to make it start tracking.


Is there anything that you kind of like felt emotionally wanting to reject from last week? No. Were there any questions?


So that was on anger. So we went on in a deep dive about the different aspects of anger as a final emotion and the ins and outs there and it was a pretty confronting session which is why I started that question. Did anybody kind of see and be like no, that's definitely not the case.


Yeah, and that's exactly the kind of disproportional emotional reaction I'm talking about, where people are able to see that it's like, this doesn't match the situation that I'm in. But it feels that strong anyway. Can be very difficult to ignore because there's always some degree of uncertainty there. And if the mistakes seem finer, even if the chances of something bad happening out of it are low, then they can still draw our attention in as something pertinent to deal with. And it's out of proportion based on the other things that we might have to react to in terms of the amount of reaction that we have. There usually what I see there. And while it is true in general that people with ADHD, people with ADHD may have a higher emotional volume in general, when I see that kind of like disproportional motion reaction even at the time, rather than people with ADHD, often maybe they get mad about something and they're not mad about it half an hour later. So that's not so much like anger as like, this is an impulse at that time that's being more highly expressed and it might feel very strong in that moment, but it just doesn't last as long.


But then when things do blast, even we can feel it at the moment to see that the amount of emotion that you're feeling at that time is more significant than it ought to be, and you can actually note that at the time. That tends to be related to the types of core belief players based forms that we're talking about as well.


Yeah. ADHD or not, rumination is going to be there when things really bother us. Now, this can be due to traumas around that kind of issue. Or, like, reminders of things or bothers us more. It can be just that you will emotionally feel it significantly at that time. But when it comes to rumination, anybody can do with it as long as something does bother them. The impulse of kind of getting mad about things can exacerbate the degree to which we ruminate. Only insofar as, like, if we get caught up into a negative thinking style. Like, say, I think I've given the example in the past of, like, say, if I'm driving a car and somebody drives in front of me and then slows down and I can't walk past them, and my thinking style is something that I can give it just as well as my actions. Right? So if my resources are high enough that I'm, like, destressed, I'm feeling pretty good, I'm in good mood, whatever it is, then I might be able to see that and be, like, pretty quickly divert from the this is unfair. They're messing up the rest of us.


What a dick. Sorry. All the negative kind of things that make me angrier and be like, well, hold on a SEC. I could have done that before. They might not even know. It doesn't really swim down a significant way, these other kind of ideas. And you see that the amount of anger and therefore illumination after the fact will actually be related to the impulse of anger insofar as we let ourselves run loose in that kind of thinking style. So hopefully it'll become clear, like, when you kind of reflect on the various situations where you may experience that as we're going through the various kind of core beliefs, it should be clear enough. If one of these kind of jump out at you and feels like it's thematically related to the situations that you find most stressful, what do you see in terms of how big the pictures of our star versus the slides? Can you still see the slides? I've kind of maximized it over it. Cool because I mainly like, yes, we need the slides. But ultimately having these discussions and then seeing one another is also rather useful. Okay, so I'll play this video and I'll change it to the correct mode.


Sometimes zoom settings just disappears.


Oh, yeah, you could. Cool.


Oh, okay. Look, I can try to fix it. To be fair that the video isn't that significant in terms of being able.


Yeah, just listening will be fine.


Reason.


Okay, so that was the main point that I wanted to get from that, which is just that it applies to the way that we think in all kinds of ways. And I think that it is a useful thing to understand anyway, but it'll also apply particularly to what we're going to talk about today. Because it shows how what we think and what we feel and what we do is heavily shaped by this unconscious mind aspect that's actually, frankly, calling most of the shots without us realizing it. So it makes a lot more sense to think about it in that way versus trying to think about how is my reasoning, how are my ideas of what should and shouldn't happen actually leading to my actions? The reason why that can be a very confusing path to go down is because it's inaccurate. Okay, before we jump in the palm door mode, are there any questions about any of that? Cool. All right, pong door time. Let me just move this slightly. Okay. Uncovering more of what rises. So we've covered being aware of our thoughts through mindfulness and questioning if our automated thoughts are accurate. We did that.


Well, about two weeks ago, we were talking about automatic thoughts to refine points and stuff like that. Then last week, we have discussed how thoughts can be accurate and yet be unhelpful. That kind of secondary gain stuff. So to know that kind of lack of simplicity, lack of direct connection with, I think this, and therefore I do this, because it's not just that simple today. We've now reflected and expanded on the recognition that we act on desires that we have not put into words or decided to act on. We do this all the time. Most of the desires on which we act, we haven't necessarily actually made direct decisions about. So what can we further understand about our emotions? It's just that our past experiences, they form the basis for our reactions now to a much higher degree than we would consciously realize. All right, so we experience failure when people look down on our achievements or punish us for not doing better.


Okay. Sorry.


Yeah. Thanks for letting me know. How's that? That's good. Now I can't see you. Oh, hold on. How's that? See the slide? It's all good now. I just had to uncheck optimize the video anyway. Okay, so you go back to those situations that I've described in the past regarding failure, because people with ADHD are going to fluctuate on their ability, particularly when they're younger. They're going to fluctuate on their ability day to day at school, depending on the degree to which they're interested in the content. And because that's not the same way as neurotypical people operate. And that's what the teacher is expecting, and in most cases the teacher is neurotypical, then they're going to assess it from that point of view and be like, okay, so what would make me fluctuate in the same kind of way? Well, my ability would be to agree with the height that I can perform at, and then to not do that all the time must be laziness or not caring enough to reach my potential or whatever it is. So that's the feedback that they give to people with ADHD and it's all over everybody's report cards with ADHD, frankly, like, you know, got so much potential if only they tried harder, that kind of thing.


And when you know that you've tried hard and you're being told that it's not enough and you don't know why, then that leads to the sense that you have failed and that it's unpredictable because you don't know what determined that that was a failure versus other times. And because of that unpredictability, it can seem inevitable going to the future that at some point looming around any given form might be some failure, and then responding to that situation, we're going to do different things, right? So enough failure, for example, or enough of that kind of experience, it can make us stop trying new things or to try things without believing we can actually do them. Therefore we are affirming our prediction that we will fail. So imagine that you sign up to do a course or something like that, right? But if in the back of your mind, without even consciously realizing that you believe that you're inevitably going to fail, even if you try hard, and it often is like, if we directly analyze that idea and realize that it's the case, we can often realize that it's actually inaccurate. But without doing so, it kind of stands there in the background and then we react to it.


People might actually do the course, but because they think that they're going to fail no matter what, they want to have an ability to dismiss that at the end. And they can do that if they're like, okay, so I didn't read all the readings or I didn't do all this. There's something that they can finish the exam and be like, okay, I didn't do as well as I wanted to or whatever it was because I didn't do XY or Z and therefore I didn't really fail because I didn't really try. But when we look back to these times, it feels like failure just the same. And oftentimes it's only because of that expectation and therefore not trying hard enough, because we legitimately. Don't think that it's going to work. That can actually be the only reason that people actually failed. Now, just as an example, you remember this kind of going back to the very first week. If you just try as hard as other kids and thinking, like, how do they just say interested all the time, realizing, like, I do care, this is me trying, and then being told things like, you're so lazy.


Anyone brave enough to share their experience of failure, whether it's their perceived failure from their point of view, whether it really is or not, it felt like it.


Yeah, it's interesting to note that when we don't, like, fully kind of shine a light on it, so to speak, we can have beliefs that we would be able to disprove, in a sense, very quickly if we actually shined a light on and really thought about it. But oftentimes we can still kind of feel that they're true. Like, sometimes, even when my place has been messy and I felt very avoided, I really didn't want to kind of clean it up, or I didn't want to engage with this or the other that I realized upon when I finally kind of get around and I complete it, there's a sense of, like, yes, I did. There's a sense of accomplishment that wouldn't really make sense if there wasn't some doubt that I could do it, even though it's a task that I've done a bunch of times before. It's like the doubt that I have in the back of my mind that I'll be able to make myself do it, I guess. And oftentimes people have that and it will drive procrastination, even though it's like, well, hold on. Like, I know that I can or I'm going to prove it to myself in some small way.


I'll do a tiny amount of it or whatever it is. And that can often be the bite that it has to jump in. Gosh, it's here. Me. Yeah, all right, so how to deal with that kind of formula? So don't set yourself up to fail. It's a really obvious one in that sense. It's like really kind of thinking through when you've taken something on, especially you can get used to spotting that sense of like, how confident do I really feel deep down that I'll be able to do it? And then just to know what would set me up for the best chance of success here. And when you kind of like list it down like, that oftentimes will be like, there will be part of that list where you're like, yeah, I was going to like that. I should read this, that or the other before I start the course. Two weeks before it starts. And it's like little things get left out. But if you kind of make a list, it's like, well, these are the things that at least I kind of have a good sense if I do this, that's going to set myself up for the best chance.


Then make sure that you complete all of these things. It's really important to note if you realize, oh, yeah, I wasn't going to do one, I wasn't down that path, or like, I kind of don't want to do something like that, even though I know it's going to be helpful. That's a good sign that there is something like this going on. Related also to train, feel this impulsive, think through new situations all the way. This might be even like doing it for like looking a week ahead, looking month ahead, looking a semester ahead, whatever it is, breaking it down into chunks and being like, just taking that time to know, how much of a commitment is this? Have I taken on other things? Like, oftentimes you might, for example, take on a few things knowing that you don't have enough time to do any of them. And so that could be like setting yourself up to fail. Because it's like, okay, I have to not do this other thing in order to do this. I know that for sure. And the thing is, you can only know that for sure, really by intentionally looking ahead.


It's like, if I don't remove this other thing, I can't place another thing in. And that allows you to be more specific about what you actually can fit into that agenda. Imagine new situations like experiments going back to the goal setting and reflecting on those goals. Is this plan like, what a workout with your resources right now. Sometimes it's a matter of being like, well, I'm not going to apply for this course right now, but I really want to be able to complete it. If I get into it right now, I know that I'm not going to have the time or headspace or whatever, so I'm going to plan for another time. Because that can also be part of setting yourself up to fail is like take it on when you know that you don't have enough time or resources to do it anyway. And remember that failure is a totally essential part, of course, of achieving a big goal. The likelihood of never coming up short at any stage along the line and achieving something big that requires many potential failure points. It's just unrealistic. We learn through failure. We can only kind of like probe and test a new environment or a new situation or a new strategy by actually allowing that vulnerability of failure.


It should be seen as a really positive thing. And I know that a lot of people talk about this, but it's a really easy one to get too. Use a curious mind approach like you do with goals. So what about this experiment did not yield total success? If you put yourself into a course of situation, some sort of competitive environment that you wanted to succeed in, you can look back at that as a goal that you had in mind and to bring yourself back to that experimental experimenting, kind of curious approach. Be like, okay, I mean, did I actually fail because that was always going to happen or it was just too much for me or something like that. Or did I fail because of something that I could have changed or I can change next time in a similar situation and therefore learn something out of it. Now remember, the failure dichotomy from goal maintaining not in black and white in the sense of absolute failure is any deviation from total success. And also to ask yourself questions like did you get closer than the last time? If it's a repetitive task you're going for?


Did you achieve some of what you set out to do? Did you achieve more than you would have achieved if you haven't put yourself into that goal and therefore you're still expanding on your own ability even if you didn't complete that really large thing, if it is now, they're not good enough one. So this is also to do with capability, but it's kind of like an extension on not being capable to do things as like well okay, if I'm not capable of doing things or even not necessarily just about capability, there's something about me that is not good enough for relationships or for this or for that. If we develop a theme of never being fully validated by others and this also relates to platonic friendships, we end up forming the idea that we're not good enough as we are, and that can end up leading to some sort of compensation. Right? So the belief that we're not good enough often leads to using people pleasing where it's like, well, I don't believe that I'm like an awesome person to be friends with anyway. Well, I better do things for the people in my life so that they don't leave because it's just me.


Or you've got to excel at something because if you get criticized in other areas, but then there's something that you always get praised for, whether it's like music or sport performance or academia or jobs or whatever it is, then it's like, okay, well, I do enough of that. Then I'm going to get that adoration that I am pairing with praise, even though that's not necessarily what it actually is. And therefore that becomes a sense of like, I must be so unbelievably good at it in order to make up for this thing. Because ultimately, as you get a bit better at it, it doesn't actually lead to more feeling of validation because it's like there's a facade, there's a mask there, because you can always say to yourself, yes, but if they only knew real me, they only liked me because I've been showing them only the best sides. If they saw the state of my house or they saw this or saw that, then they would just reject me on the cuff of it. So there's always some way to dismiss any validation that occurs. So then it's like chasing it through something that actually neutralizes any validation rather than actually increasing it, if that makes sense.


All right, don't worry about the question. Are there any comments or questions about any of that?


Okay, that's good to know. Thank you for telling me whether you're joking because I was like, alright, cool. Is anybody hearing any of this? And there are parts that aren't feeling like they hit the nail on the head or there are situations that they would like to be able to explain that may relate but don't seem obviously related to this.


Yeah, absolutely.


Yeah, of course.


Yeah, I mean, even like my experience, I had to do a lot of like, training out of this kind of like compensation that I would do by trying to seem like the smartest or most successful or something like that. And you think of, like, the ways that it would come out is like when I was talking to people, I guess sometimes I would, because you got to think, like, there's an erroneous belief underlying it all that I didn't know about at the time, which was like, the way that I'm going to be cared for and valued as a person is how smart I am or how successful. So then when you meet people or when you're chatting with people and stuff, there's a part of you that wants them to know or wants them to think that you're smart. So then it's like, leads to boasting or leads to wanting to win arguments and stuff like that, so that you don't come across as losing face in that particular way. And of course, it's important to note that people like one another, not for any performance basis. Like, it might be nice to have A chat with somebody who has some common interests or whatever it is, but it's like people who are warm and kind and welcoming, they're the people who we tend to gravitate toward.


And what I was doing was actually pushing people away who I might have been friends with, because I was like, either people would be securing themselves and then they hear somebody like boasting or trying to sound like they're really smart, and they're like, oh, it's a shame that they feel the need to do that, or they're to some degree, not. And then they feel like crap. And maybe they admire and want to be you, but they also want to knock you off the perch. It's a competitive thing. It's not like a nice mutual compliment of respect. It takes them out training of it over time and also to build up the sense of confidence in yourself that you don't require that sense of a blanket. And that's actually not a blanket anymore, like anyway, because it's making me colder.


I almost don't even know how to.


Yeah. Taking criticism effectively is very, very difficult. When you've got the sense that if you allow that criticism to stand, as in you don't, like, convince the person that the criticism was invalid, then you can't convince yourself that it's invalid. So then you've got to take that on. But if you have a sense of failure, dichotomy any failure in that sense means that I'm crap, then it's like all you want to do as soon as you get criticism is convince the other person that it was invalid, which is the opposite of taking on the value of the criticism. There would have been some frustrating times for, like, my first supervisor in Masters as I was kind of growing into it, realizing like, okay, I'm going to have to mature up a bit so that I can actually take the best out of these situations, because the criticism had value. But all I wanted to do was prove that it was invalid. All right. Okay. So stepping out of people pleasing, so behind people pleasing cancellia fear that people will go away. They would stop wanting to be around you. They'll stop you as a person if you stop doing things for them.


The problem in laid in that is that when we always do it, then we're never actually testing out the idea of what if I don't, maybe it'll be okay. You never test that out if you're always actually doing the people pleasing. It's like if you see somebody and every time you give them an apple pie, you don't know whether they like you or the apple pie until you don't give them an apple pie and see whether they still want to be a friend. The apple pie is not a serious thing, but that's the people pleasing in this case. And that's the thing we need to allow potentially erroneous in this case. We are always erroneous ideas. Like, if we stop people pleasing, we'll stop having friends, that kind of thing. We need to allow these things to be tested. And we can see that by fully retaining people pleasing as a method. And fear, of course, drives the lack of exceptions there. Then you never get to prove to yourself on a visceral level that it's actually fine anyway. And that intellectual gift, like going back to the metaphor that Jonathan Hart was talking about with the elephant and the writer, this is where we're talking about.


Like, you can have a disproportional emotional reaction because the idea of your proportion, this is based on your prefrontal cortex, your reasoning about what should I feel? And then that's mismatched because we don't have direct contact with this experiential hindbrain that is far, far more intricate and complex. It's going through all of the experiences that we've had and filtering through and developing a probabilistic model of what's going to happen in whatever situation. It's actually very complicated, right? But we don't have access to very much of that at all. So we're kind of guessing at it a bit. But it's just worth noting that it's like, okay, so when we have the disproportional emotional reaction, there's an elephant there in a sense who is feeling this emotional reaction because of the experiences that we've had. And the only way that that elephant we can't just like talk to and be like, hey, buddy, it's all good. We've got to prove to it because the elephant experience is what we experience. We have to throw ourselves into the experiences and prove to the elephant that it's okay, not to people, please. And we can only do that by allowing ourselves to be in situations over time, little by little, where we're not people pleasing in order to show the elephant that it doesn't mean the end of the world when we don't do it and therefore that we're okay anyway.


So I've got there. The answer is to start providing people you care about with the kind of things for which you want them to value. Because it's also worth noting that with people pleasing, oftentimes people will get very they'll be doing that for years and then they actually develop a real resentment for the people around them because they're like, well, people are only seeking me when they want something, you know, it's like, well, okay, but what do you provide to them? You know, and it's like, well, I provide things to them. DA DA DA. Okay, so what would feel fulfilling? And this will be a different answer slightly for different people, but it tends to be like, I would like them to actually want me around when it's not just what I can give them or provide them or whatever. Like, I can think of a client, for example, who he actually has ADHD as well. He's a barrister and he has friends and family members who like, they generally seek him out when they want some legal advice or he's wealthy, so maybe they want some financial systems and stuff. And it's not that he has a real problem with doing that in general.


It's that's a strategy that has kind of always been there to be cared for. And through training out of this people pleasing, he was then able to kind of see what was going on and wanted to kind of retract completely. It was like, hold on a second. People will seek you out for what you provide to them. And if that's stuff or if that's your utility, your time, whatever it is, then that's what they're going to seek you for. We ended up having a chat and realizing, like, you know, them wanting you around when there are good times, when there are bad times, caring about your opinion as a confident or a person, these are things that he actually would feel valued and fulfilled by. So it's like, okay, so how can we start providing these things for the people you care about? So then they seek they know to seek you for these things rather than what they're being trained to seek you for, essentially by your actions and constantly providing that. I've had situations where I've helped people to train out of this kind of people pleasing. And then they had a rocky road with, say, their family.


If their family got used to being able to rely on like, well, they're always going to do stuff for me, then they were like, well, you just took away my slave hence. Well, not that they actually said that to me, but that was a difficulty the person had. And then it was just a matter of being like, okay, so that doesn't mean that they completely rejected you here. It's because they're expecting what they've always come to expect. And you've got to start to like it does take a bit of time often where people are very much like around us maybe trained into expecting that to retrain a new paradigm, the way that we interact. Adjusting unrelanting standards. So in unrelating standards, perfectionism, these are often talked about as essentially the same thing. Basically behind unrelating standards tend to be a fear that you will fail if you lower your standards even a fraction. I should actually mention there it also tends to be related to these prior points about validation and stuff like that. Because there's a sense of like, well, if I'm not seen as really successful anymore, then maybe people won't actually want to be around me and stuff like that.


Or perhaps people who are single might be like, who would want to be with me? Like, I just have a part time job doing this and I know people who are doing more successful things or whatever. That kind of thing could lead to people not even asking someone out or whatever, not putting themselves out there in a vulnerable way because they think that this is going to lead to rejection. Some lack of idealistic success, especially, like, by certain milestones. Like they reach the age of 25 or 30 or 40, whatever it is, until you've gone through a couple of these milestones, you realize, like you get tied in. Most people, when they're coming up to, say, 30, that kind of first, really big one that they're like they'll second guess, have I achieved as much as I wanted to or promised myself or what my friends had or whatever it is? Now? Does anybody have any questions about any of those things?


Pretty well. Nothing today on the slides is strictly only for people with ADHD.


I wouldn't say that it does. So people with and without ADHD can end up having unrelanting standards, little more common, all else being equal to people with ADHD. But to me, because there are also people with ADHD who have no trace of whatsoever, and it's always related. Like people who do have it have trauma that once you treat, they don't have it. So I don't see it as a characteristic of ADHD, which is just like the nature of how our brains work, in a sense. It doesn't need to be seen as a disorder so much as like just neurodiversity. But because of these characteristics in the modern neurotypical world that we live, people are likely to have the experiences like the ones in the classroom, like the potential rejection they may experience because of the delayed prefrontal cortex development. And stuff like that, which make it then more likely that they're going to have the ongoing effects from those types of trauma, unlenting standards being one of them. As with people pleasing, usually people go down one or the other. In terms of those two boys, they're both meant to achieve the same thing, a compensation and the same with the failure type traumas.


They're not characteristic of ADHD, but people with ADHD are more likely to have the experiences that lead to them because of characteristics that they have in the context of the common environment that they share growing up. Does that make sense?


Yeah, sorry, I didn't read it all today. Yeah. I coach clients of mine to aim for 95% of their usual standard and to build up the habit of stopping, and this is really important. Let's say that there are various problems with unrelenting standards that it causes. One of them is actually just related to if we have normal fluctuations with everything in life, our fitness, our organization, whatever it is, right? And if there's the sense that it's incredibly bad if a particular domain of that goes down, then a small fluctuation can be exacerbated. So that certainly happens. But also unrelating standards or really high standards, or the fear of not doing well if you submit something early. This is an uncertainty of like, well, if I submit it now, what if I missed something? If I submit it now, what if I miss something? And the only way to become more resilient to that kind of sense of uncertainty is to start to increase the amount of uncertainty that you allow to be there when you submit. So then being like, okay, so this essay that I'm doing or this email or whatever it is that people are kind of feeling stuck on if they're like, you know, subjectively just chasing like some sense of less than their usual standard for how far they would get before they submit it, then that can be very useful, because it increases their resilience to that uncertainty, and it proves to them over time that it's actually fine to do less of that finicking around at the end.


People can even do it where they like, let's say well, just using the same examples of, like, an email, I've quoted some people to test this out without actually risking anything in the first place, where they like, they save a draft at the point where they're like, yeah, if I wasn't so stressed out about potentially messing this up, I'd probably send it right now. Well, I'm going to save a draft and that'll have a timestamp the time that you actually saved it right, and you can continue on. You do things the way you normally do it, you send the email and then you've got a timestamp for that. So it's like, how much extra time did it take me and how much better is it? And usually it's like, it's not any better. And it was a lot of extra time. So that it provides you clear evidence that it's a good idea not to continue on that line, not that that's a bill, and you prove it to yourself over and over and it becomes a very clear consistent with your emotions and stuff like that, that overall belief and that's just very kind of like.


Well, it's that idea again of we prove things to our self over time because you can almost think of it as though, like, you've got two observers. Where the rider? We also want our elephant friend to observe that everything's okay. You can almost think about it as like you training a dog. Like, say if my dog got hit by somebody's bike, like pushback on a track or something like that. That has happened once. But he was like, let's say if that happened and then he became really nervous about bikes, right? Imagine that he's my elephant in this kind of metaphor. Now, I couldn't just be like, hey, bud, it's all good. Don't need to generalize. Not all bikes are like that. He doesn't understand what I'm saying. And he's just going to look at me and be like, so I've got to instead take him into situations where he has a neutral or positive experience with bikes. So that through that, it proves to him that bikes aren't all dangerous, and it removes that generalization well. That's the same thing we do of our self with our elephant. It's like, okay, so I feel nervous about this thing.


I know that it doesn't actually generalize, but it feels like it does. All right, well, I got to train myself. I got to provide those situations to myself that prove that it's fine. All right, home door time. So rejection. We experience rejection when we open ourselves up to seek acceptance and affection. And a deny enough rejection can make us either stop asking or get really nervous when we ask, anticipating rejection and even preempting rejection. So that preemptively rejecting others just in case, which relates to that mean picture like LeBron can't leave you if you leave him first. I don't know if you know basketball reference. I know, really, like, this is what we often do, right? It was like, oh, they're about to reject me. It's like, okay, I'm going to reject that person. And we may kind of disguise it in the sense of like, well, I'm mad at that person because blah, blah, blah, disloyalty or whatever. So I'm going to act mad at them. Like, really what we're doing is trying to reject them to remove our vulnerability, which exists because of how much we care about them. Unfortunately, I mean, you still care about them even if you push them away erroneously.


And that's not going to change just because we try to say to ourselves that it does skip that little conversation attachment style. So the one to do with, like reject first in order to not be rejected. This strategy, we could tie to the ambivalent or the anxious ambivalent attachment style. And essentially when people like the key way, because there are various different forms that can occur at different stages that may exacerbate this. Like it could be exacerbated. For example, if you get laughed at, you have a bad rejection, you get humiliated whatever it is. And that could happen even as like a teenager. It could happen in primary school. The primary attachment is between one and three years of age. This is when we're really foundationally learning how we can connect to and rely on other people. So then people will often develop this kind of push and pull, anxious ambivalent attachment style if they have intermittent care and contact from their parents. And this is like so if their parents are like their primary caregiver, which is more often than not, their mother can be their father, but it's generally one of their parents become a primary caregiver to them, the one that's really kind of relied on for security.


And if they're intermittently available because they're like, let's say they drink alcohol, so they're really drunk sometimes and they're not really there in order to pay attention and be a safety cornerstone for them, or they're grieving themselves or they're really having a hard time or whatever it is. This leads to this intermittent availability. And then kids react to that. They instinctively know that they need to be watched so that they don't do things that are dangerous, that they don't know are dangerous, right? Like they can pick up some smooth, large toy and put it in their mouth, it's kind of fine. They pick up, you know, something diseased and nasty. They need their parent to be put that down. They need to know that difference and they don't know that difference until they try. So they need to feel safe and that they can try things and that they're being watched enough to avoid any kind of problematic impact from that. Now, when they have that kind of intermittent availability, they seem clingy because they're going up and they're being like, pay attention to me, pay attention to me. And they seem like they're doing it over and over again.


But it's because they only feel secure when they're getting that full, really intense contact from their parent because it's kind of all or nothing and they feel very out of sorts when they don't have that. And then this leads over time to people getting into really strong relationship. Like, as in like really intense fleeting relationships, or to being relationships where they're like, maybe they fall hard, but maybe they fight a lot because they're worried about small things. It could be like maybe their partner during the honeymoon period text them five times a day and then they text someone once a day and they're like, oh, this must mean they don't like me anymore. There are many, many ambiguous things that can be seen as possible rejection and those can often lead to a lot of stress for people with this style, the anxious avoidant attachment style. And this is often where people have a primary attachment figure who's either who's either cold and distant in general, or they praise them almost exclusively for achievements and not just like to give them a section to show them that they're valued and okay, anyway. And what they do is they kind of learn through this at a young age, okay, so I've got to just take care of myself.


I've got to like if I'm feeling like I've had a really rough day or something I'll go and deal with that. Now on the face of it, kids who have this kind of attachment style by the way, they look like they're like oh so they're fine, they just spend a lot of time in their room but they seem happy and they experience more cortisol, more stress than the anxious ambivalent style. Even though the people with the anxious ambivalent style seem like they're more out of source, they're actually connecting to more of a degree. And as people get older and they kind of grow out of the anxious avoided style, it's like, well, they've got to, by the way, like that. These would often be people that they're happy to care for others, happy to do things for others oftentimes. But they won't put themselves in a situation where they feel reliant on another person so that they should the other person up and go or disappear or be unreliable when they're going to be screwed. They don't want themselves in that situation. So they would often like be in a relationship and maybe even be like do all the things that they ought to do with a partner except that there's like there's a sense of disengagement and that they self suit.


If they're having a hard time they sort it out, they tell their partner about it after you and this leads to a lack of that give and take in a relationship and makes people feel that makes their partner feel like they're not valued. To get through that they need to trust somebody enough in order to allow the possibility that they may be vulnerable or they may be rejected and then they can often actually experience a bit of the anxious and vivilant style as they go through that insecure functioning. It's worth noting so down the book I've read a book called Relationship RX. Ben patchon who wrote it, he's a worldrenowned couples therapist. I've done various couples training and read many books on the topic and his books and his training, I haven't seen anybody anywhere close to as good. I think that it's just very clear, very useful that one is designed to be an audio book and to be listened to with your partner chapter by chapter for people in relationships. But for those outside of relationships it can be very useful just to read, to kind of understand yourself or understand price situations you've been and stuff like that.


He will say at the start of that book like it's a good idea to do it with your partner and not to do it by yourself. But he mainly means so that people in a relationship, one person doesn't read it and then go to their partner. Being kind of leads to inequality because they think they know everything. Like if you're in a relationship, do it together, but you can do it alone if you're not in a relationship. And I mean, secure attachment is just like when people come into your environment. It's not like for people anxious avoided when people come into their environments like this. Stress I've got to keep up a base of when I'm around this environment, so it's more stressful. People around relief when they leave. The opposite for anxious ambivalen, it's like, okay, finally they're here. And stress when they leave for people who are securely attached or secure functioning. And I say secure functioning is functioning securely as though they are securely attached in the context of a relationship, which can occur for anybody regardless of their primary attachment style, by the way. No, I lost it. Does anyone.


I lost my train of thought with the last couple of things.


So the description anxious ambivalent attachments are secure functioning or being securely attached within the relationship.


Okay, so people who have anxious avoidance attachment style, they tend to be more stressed when they're like, if they're alone and somebody comes into their environment, they're more stressed. Anxious ambivalent person would be like, we leave at that point, and then stress when they leave. Right. Person will be more stressed when they come in and will leave when they go because there's no need to hold up a facade or whatever at that time. People who are purely attached will feel comfortable and fine when they come and when they go. This can be led toward. And what that book will go through, by the way, is like, here are the various attachment styles when they mix in various ways in terms of relationships, these are often the challenges that people have in relationships that they need to get through. When there are those mixings and you'll have actors that are playing out the mock fights and stuff like that definitely worth the read to anybody who wants to understand attachment and relationships better.


And the answer is, yeah. And that book will go through. So Stan talks a lot about secure functioning in that book where it's like essentially in couples therapy. His position will be like, I'm going to assume that they're going to be secure, functioning, and if they care about the relationship enough and they stick to therapy, that's what will be the result. And if they're not willing to make the compromises to do what's required to actually get into that mode, then it's like, okay, therapy will either succeed or it will discontinue in general in that moment.


Yeah, I mean, there's some theory whether could there be confusion of trauma and ADHD? I've worked with people who have all of the same sorts of trauma, who are neurotypical who have ADHD and have ASD they're present in any of those situations. If I'm chatting with somebody and they have particular sensitivities around something thematically related to failure or rejection or something else that we've talked about today, then I would probe in to see whether I wouldn't just jump to the conclusion from that that they have ADHD. By that point, I'm likely to have a fair idea of whether they have ADHD or not from a bunch of other things that they say. Does that answer your question?


Yeah, absolutely. All the kinds of experiences that we've talked about, aside from this week and a bit of last week, most of the things are particularly related to ADHD. Try to make a point of being like, this is particularly ADHD, this is just experienced by many people. And like, the ones that are distinctly applicable to people with ADHD will be those diagnostic markers for me. And so trauma is just not something that exists only within that vessel. So it wouldn't be a diagnostic marker. It's still going to be a really important part of what I work on if it's a neurotypical or ADHD, but it won't be a marker whether they have it.


Yeah, absolutely. I'm yet to talk to a person who has ADHD about their report cards and what teachers say, where they haven't said something like, has lots of potential. And when you hear that, even though that may not come across as a negative thing, it's saying that even though you've tried your hardest and you know that your teacher doesn't and doesn't think that's the case, so you're being told that by saying you've got a lot of potential, it's like, well, you're not reaching it. And then you're like, why am I not reaching and I'm trying. And then that leads to oftentimes it can lead then to try to grab on to the idea of okay, well maybe I must be lazy. Well, if I'm either a lazy or a failure, thinking that those are the only two options, then people will often gravitate toward lazy. And even like I can think of I think that I even tried to aggrandize this sense of like, well, if people have to do all the question sets to know their stuff, then my high school self would be like, well, they're not even smart. They just have to try too hard.


So like basically it's like defining the thing that I could be good at which is like quickly learning from a small amount of stuff versus doing the tons of extra stuff. I like to find that as being the key intelligent marker or whatever because it's nonsense, right? Because generally speaking we know as adults that if we really want to be good at anything there's going to be a lot of grit involved. Cool. So this is just the last slide, guys. Which is just what? If you've understood these things that I've talked about today and you've done some work individually to try to improve the situation. But either you've struggled to actually take the leaps necessary or you've come up short or it hasn't. Been as effective as you've hoped, then help is certainly out there finding a psychologist who specializes down the bottom there in something like EMDR, which stands for eye Movement desensitization Reprocessing. Not my name or imagery scripting. These are the two that I'm trained in that are what we could call experiential type techniques. There are others but these are my two favorites. But if you found like you can Google like psychologists will have on their bio the types of things that they're trained on.


So googling psychologists in your area with NDR injury scripting could be a good way of finding somebody who's likely to be adept to this stuff because I guarantee most psychologists won't necessarily be at those types of therapeutic protocols which is like they're not the only way to do it but they're the best. That's my humble opinion. I'll explain why though so the CBT based approach in Australia and the UK and most of Europe CBT is going to be the foundational training that psychologists have. In South Africa it kind of leans toward the psychodynamic and in America they use a mix of CBT and psychodynamic as well. But generally speaking, this will be the foundation for Australian Psychologist which the the way through the CBT approach that core beliefs are restructured is to build up an alternative and mutually exclusive core belief in contrast to it over time by really noting down the evidence for it that you spot. So if your core belief essentially is something like, I can't consistently do anything over time, then it's like building up an alternative where it's like, you know, you may not be perfect, but it's like, no, I can actually do things consistently in a way that matters, or whatever it is, and then building up that by bits and pieces of evidence.


It works. I don't think it works completely based on my observation. And it takes ages. So that would take like many sessions over a year or more to really kind of build up. If somebody has a strong alternative and negative core belief imagery scripting takes like three sessions tops. Well, not tops. I mean, maybe four or five, tops. Most of the time, not more than three sessions. So you're kind of thinking about the amount of time and the amount of effectiveness that are in either technique, and those are the ones that are available to treat this kind of thing. All right, guys, so that's a bit of everything from week nine. Does anybody have any questions about any of those or want to discuss any part of what we talked about today?


Missing this one?


Say the first part again. So if they're in what situation?


The answer is likely. And it depends on it depends on the cause of the Rumination. If I'm talking to a client and I can see that it's particular situations that lead to Rumination more than others, like they could have frustrations or whatever related to something not to do with failure or rejection or something like that, and they're kind of reasonably okay with dealing with that. But when it relates to one or more of these themes that they really have trouble with that and Ruminate, then that would tell me that it's probably related to some sort of trauma, in which case those techniques would absolutely help. If it is not related to a particular trauma and people are ruminating for some other reason, then that's just not going to be the right tool for the job. But it can be detected by looking at the themes that lead to the most difficult emotional situation and therefore Rumination.


I'm not like, rushing, by the way, I'm just standing up because I don't know, partly because I can and I couldn't before. Yeah, go ahead, Merlin.


That sounds like it probably relates to the type of things that we've talked about today, just in terms of the distinction between anxiety and general emotional dysregulation. Emotional dysregulation is a broader term which is going to include anxiety as the challenging emotion that we have when we're worried about things in the future that might go wrong. So it's that particular thing. So we could get upset about different things and become so dysregulated. It's just like you don't have full control over your emotions. They're not regulated in a consistent, steady way. So it's like, okay, so if they feel like if you feel like your emotions are very strong and your ability is higher your laboratory, then this could be described as emotional dysregulation. And this can occur when people are really anxious or when they're really angry, when it's not foundationally because they're feeling vulnerable due to anxiety or when they're like there are different situations, anxiety being one of them. Does that feel that one? Yes.


Yes. So anxiety being one challenging emotion that can lead to that kind of dysregulation because emotional dysregulation, this is just a descriptive term, right? Yeah, it's just when your emotions feel dysregulated and anxiety is one of those what we could consider an emotion for the sake of this conversation. Okay.


We can have some anxiety without being dysregulated, but it's a form of emotion that when it's really intense, it can feel like we're dysregulated. Does that clarification help? That wasn't an answer to your question. I was just clarifying that that makes sense.


For your first question. In order to distinguish, like, emotional dysregulation okay. The types of medications that are used for anxiety. So, like, the first point of call would be an SSRI, a selective serotonin react inhibitor that's going to target a separate neurotransmitter to what we know is underregulated for people with ADHD on average. Now, generally speaking, the kind of resilience that people have to temper when they have a boost to their serotonin is higher because they tend to they have talked about this in the past, where people are giving the analogy of, like, a resource scarce environment versus a resource resource dance. Like, you got everything you need. People will naturally have more serotonin regulation when they're in situations that are safe, that everybody gets what they need, versus a more competitive, scarce environment where they have less serotonin. They tend to be more competitive, they feel less connected. So people who are high on serotonin tend to show more emotion on their face, just in general. And people like, if they, like, have a very, like, say if they're, like, sitting on the train, probably a low serotonin person just kind of noting some of those little subjective differences.


But talking about what would be helpful oftentimes for people with ADHD in fact, I've talked to many people with ADHD who were misdiagnosed with depression or something like that in the past, or anxiety or whatever, and then they've been given an SSRI, and oftentimes they don't find it useful. That's not always the case. Like, people with ADHD may have underregulated serotonin. It is not related to ADHD. It's not a characteristics of it, but just like anybody else, they could, in which case they would have a benefit from increasing it. But as I said, like, that that's not on average. And issue four people with ADHD, people can tell one of the really simple ways that a psychiatrist might be able to might distinguish that with somebody, because SSRIs tend to be safe, low kind of side effects and stuff like that. They may very well trial somebody on it, provided that they have made sure that they don't have other risk factors with those kind of medications, just to kind of see, okay, does this help? Does this not help? Hopefully that's a useful kind of answer, even though it's not like a pinpointed answer directly to your question, because I don't know that there is necessarily a pinpointed, like without having more of a discussion to figure out whether what may apply for you in particular.


Having an individual conversation would be the best way to suss that out.


Yeah, sure.


Does it extinguish.


Allows us to the best metaphor that I've heard, I think for what they do, essentially, is like, when we have a trauma like that, it's kind of like let's say the trauma is around rejection. It's kind of like there's a box labeled rejection with all the experiences that feel like they may relate that kind of get thrown in there. And then anytime we experience any amount of it, that box gets opened up, and we're feeling like all the flood gates get opened. And basically these techniques are about opening up that box and sorting it out and figuring out like reintegrating, what does this actually mean to me? So that then we don't have this full unprocessed box that's going to storm at us when we actually experience some small amount of it because that's where the disportional emotional reaction comes, at least from subjective point of view. For me, if I went to the.


My concern with Emvr, the reason why I use imagery scripting, it'll answer your question. The reason why I use imagery scripting first is because imagery scripting takes a bit less time and it's a bit less complicated to teach to the client. Now the reason why I still know and use EMDR is because you don't need to know the exact memory in order to go through it because part of MDR is free association. So while you're going through the process, you can uncover it without actually having to consciously reveal it beforehand. So only in cases where I'm not able to help somebody to identify what the most likely causative memory is would I use MDR because of that. Otherwise injury or sweeping would be origin. All right guys. Well you've done. Amazing. This is all nine weeks of the content. So next week we're just going to be going through having maybe a bit of a funeral, more casual week, I don't know, pretty casual but yeah, we're just going to be going through and revising what we've already gone through. Thanks so much and if there are.


I have not looked into that. I don't know. I doubt that you're going to have a significant amount of adrenaline leftover after a movie. But maybe I'm not going to say definitely not. But I haven't heard of it myself. But exercise because exercise that's going to upregulate norepinephrine via adrenalizing, the whole system and stuff like that. And then we have a two hour window after doing half an hour of high intensity cardio exercise where we're more adrenalized and we have access to more of an effort and we can focus better. Pomodoro technique being just remember that's relying on classical conditioning to use the same thing. And honestly I think that the main benefit of this watch. For me is being able to Adrenalize myself a little bit by giving myself a shock. I can't do it. Instead of that, lethargy of like, oh, just watch this. So various ways, I guess, and maybe just get yourself a taser. Only slightly joking.


Yeah, it actually has been working for me, where, like, my place is cleaner now, but yeah, just like to stop me.


When I'm kind of being lazy and just kind of lying around and there's something to do, it just allows me to get that kind of like I don't know, just to get that little bit of a boost to just do it like a jumpstart and you stand up. It's not hard to do these things. It's just hard to make yourself. It's like waiting through mud before you decide fully you're going to do it. And then it's just like, oh, it's not actually hard anymore. It's just doing the dishes.


Yeah. John said that he couldn't make it today, but we'll be able to see because he's got his new watch, so we'll be able to see next week what he's come up with for his and how it's going for him. He said it's really good, and it's really interesting. So I call it hurts, but it's really good. All right, cool, guys. I'll see you then.


Sure.


So I don't know. You have to talk to psychiatrist. I think that about that once, but I'm not sure whether they actually well, actually, no, I haven't heard of that. I've heard of people use it because there's a diagnosis around premenstrual dysphoric disorder. PDD is what they call it, where, like, people have don't get me wrong, if you're in pain and you're having cramping pains and stuff, that's going to mess with your ability to handle the rigors of life and stuff like that in general. But for some people, it's like, really pronounced. And sometimes they will take an antidepressant, actually, where they like an SSRI, where they actually up their dosage around that time. This is not related to ADHD so much, but this is definitely an area where you'd have to chat with your psychiatrists. Out of my depth there anyway. So your psychiatrist is definitely needed for that.

